The Project Gutenberg eBook of Manhattan Transfer
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.
Title: Manhattan Transfer
Author: John Dos Passos
Release date: October 11, 2023 [eBook #71853]
Language: English
Original publication: New York: Harper & Brothers, 1925
Credits: Carol Brown, Emmanuel Ackerman and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MANHATTAN TRANSFER ***
Transcriber’s Note:
Often, contracted words lack an apostrophe, two words are printed as
one, and elipses and hyphens are used inconsistently. Words may have
multiple spelling variations; all variations were retained as printed.
Dialect, obsolete words, alternative spellings and misspelled words
were not corrected.
Words and phrases in italics are surrounded by underscores, _like
this_. Obvious printing errors, such as backwards, upside down, or
partially printed letters and punctuation, were corrected. Unprinted
final stops and quotation marks were added.
                          _Manhattan Transfer_
                      _By John Dos Passos_
                         _One Man’s Initiation_
                            _Three Soldiers_
                     _Rosinante to the Road Again_
                        _A Pushcart at the Curb_
                          _Manhattan Transfer_
                           _Streets of Night_
[Illustration: design]
                           Manhattan Transfer
                                   By
                            John Dos Passos
                        [Illustration: colophon]
                      Harper & Brothers Publishers
                          New York and London
                           MANHATTAN TRANSFER
                  COPYRIGHT, 1925, BY JOHN DOS PASSOS
                        PRINTED IN THE U. S. A.
                             TENTH PRINTING
                            CONTENTS
        _First Section_
        I FERRYSLIP      _3_
        II METROPOLIS      _12_
        III DOLLARS      _49_
        IV TRACKS      _78_
        V STEAMROLLER      _112_
        _Second Section_
        I GREAT LADY ON A WHITE HORSE      _129_
        II LONGLEGGED JACK OF THE ISTHMUS      _144_
        III NINE DAYS’ WONDER      _169_
        IV FIRE ENGINE      _202_
        V WENT TO THE ANIMALS’ FAIR      _217_
        VI FIVE STATUTORY QUESTIONS      _237_
        VII ROLLERCOASTER      _249_
        VIII ONE MORE RIVER TO JORDAN      _255_
        _Third Section_
        I REJOICING CITY THAT DWELT CARELESSLY      _271_
        II NICKELODEON      _291_
        III REVOLVING DOORS      _305_
        IV SKYSCRAPER      _351_
        V THE BURTHEN OF NINEVEH      _371_
                            _First Section_
I. Ferryslip
          _Three gulls wheel above the broken boxes, orangerinds,
          spoiled cabbage heads that heave between the splintered
          plank walls, the green waves spume under the round bow as
          the ferry, skidding on the tide, crashes, gulps the broken
          water, slides, settles slowly into the slip. Handwinches
          whirl with jingle of chains. Gates fold upwards, feet step
          out across the crack, men and women press through the
          manuresmelling wooden tunnel of the ferryhouse, crushed and
          jostling like apples fed down a chute into a press._
The nurse, holding the basket at arm’s length as if it were a bedpan,
opened the door to a big dry hot room with greenish distempered walls
where in the air tinctured with smells of alcohol and iodoform hung
writhing a faint sourish squalling from other baskets along the wall.
As she set her basket down she glanced into it with pursed-up lips.
The newborn baby squirmed in the cottonwool feebly like a knot of
earthworms.
On the ferry there was an old man playing the violin. He had a monkey’s
face puckered up in one corner and kept time with the toe of a cracked
patent-leather shoe. Bud Korpenning sat on the rail watching him, his
back to the river. The breeze made the hair stir round the tight line
of his cap and dried the sweat on his temples. His feet were blistered,
he was leadentired, but when the ferry moved out of the slip, bucking
the little slapping scalloped waves of the river he felt something warm
and tingling shoot suddenly through all his veins. “Say, friend, how
fur is it into the city from where this ferry lands?” he asked a young
man in a straw hat wearing a blue and white striped necktie who stood
beside him.
The young man’s glance moved up from Bud’s road-swelled shoes to the
red wrist that stuck out from the frayed sleeves of his coat, past the
skinny turkey’s throat and slid up cockily into the intent eyes under
the broken-visored cap.
“That depends where you want to get to.”
“How do I get to Broadway?... I want to get to the center of things.”
“Walk east a block and turn down Broadway and you’ll find the center of
things if you walk far enough.”
“Thank you sir. I’ll do that.”
The violinist was going through the crowd with his hat held out, the
wind ruffling the wisps of gray hair on his shabby bald head. Bud
found the face tilted up at him, the crushed eyes like two black pins
looking into his. “Nothin,” he said gruffly and turned away to look
at the expanse of river bright as knifeblades. The plank walls of the
slip closed in, cracked as the ferry lurched against them; there was
rattling of chains, and Bud was pushed forward among the crowd through
the ferryhouse. He walked between two coal wagons and out over a dusty
expanse of street towards yellow streetcars. A trembling took hold of
his knees. He thrust his hands deep in his pockets.
EAT on a lunchwagon halfway down the block. He slid stiffly onto a
revolving stool and looked for a long while at the pricelist.
“Fried eggs and a cup o coffee.”
“Want ’em turned over?” asked the redhaired man behind the counter
who was wiping off his beefy freckled forearms with his apron. Bud
Korpenning sat up with a start.
“What?”
“The eggs? Want em turned over or sunny side up?”
“Oh sure, turn ’em over.” Bud slouched over the counter again with his
head between his hands.
“You look all in, feller,” the man said as he broke the eggs into the
sizzling grease of the frying pan.
“Came down from upstate. I walked fifteen miles this mornin.”
The man made a whistling sound through his eyeteeth. “Comin to the big
city to look for a job, eh?”

Bud nodded. The man flopped the eggs sizzling and netted with brown out
onto the plate and pushed it towards Bud with some bread and butter on
the edge of it. “I’m goin to slip you a bit of advice, feller, and it
won’t cost you nutten. You go an git a shave and a haircut and brush
the hayseeds out o yer suit a bit before you start lookin. You’ll be
more likely to git somethin. It’s looks that count in this city.”

“I kin work all right. I’m a good worker,” growled Bud with his mouth
full.

“I’m tellin yez, that’s all,” said the redhaired man and turned back to
his stove.

When Ed Thatcher climbed the marble steps of the wide hospital entry he
was trembling. The smell of drugs caught at his throat. A woman with a
starched face was looking at him over the top of a desk. He tried to
steady his voice.

“Can you tell me how Mrs. Thatcher is?”

“Yes, you can go up.”

“But please, miss, is everything all right?”

“The nurse on the floor will know anything about the case. Stairs to
the left, third floor, maternity ward.”

Ed Thatcher held a bunch of flowers wrapped in green waxed paper. The
broad stairs swayed as he stumbled up, his toes kicking against the
brass rods that held the fiber matting down. The closing of a door cut
off a strangled shriek. He stopped a nurse.

“I want to see Mrs. Thatcher, please.”

“Go right ahead if you know where she is.”

“But they’ve moved her.”

“You’ll have to ask at the desk at the end of the hall.”

He gnawed his cold lips. At the end of the hall a redfaced woman looked
at him, smiling.

“Everything’s fine. You’re the happy father of a bouncing baby girl.”

“You see it’s our first and Susie’s so delicate,” he stammered with
blinking eyes.

“Oh yes, I understand, naturally you worried.... You can go in and talk
to her when she wakes up. The baby was born two hours ago. Be sure not
to tire her.”

Ed Thatcher was a little man with two blond wisps of mustache and
washedout gray eyes. He seized the nurse’s hand and shook it showing
all his uneven yellow teeth in a smile.

“You see it’s our first.”

“Congratulations,” said the nurse.

Rows of beds under bilious gaslight, a sick smell of restlessly
stirring bedclothes, faces fat, lean, yellow, white; that’s her.
Susie’s yellow hair lay in a loose coil round her little white face
that looked shriveled and twisted. He unwrapped the roses and put them
on the night table. Looking out the window was like looking down into
water. The trees in the square were tangled in blue cobwebs. Down the
avenue lamps were coming on marking off with green shimmer brickpurple
blocks of houses; chimney pots and water tanks cut sharp into a sky
flushed like flesh. The blue lids slipped back off her eyes.

“That you Ed?... Why Ed they are Jacks. How extravagant of you.”

“I couldn’t help it dearest. I knew you liked them.”

A nurse was hovering near the end of the bed.

“Couldn’t you let us see the baby, miss?”

The nurse nodded. She was a lanternjawed grayfaced woman with tight
lips.

“I hate her,” whispered Susie. “She gives me the fidgets that woman
does; she’s nothing but a mean old maid.”

“Never mind dear, it’s just for a day or two.” Susie closed her eyes.

“Do you still want to call her Ellen?”

The nurse brought back a basket and set it on the bed beside Susie.

“Oh isn’t she wonderful!” said Ed. “Look she’s breathing.... And
they’ve oiled her.” He helped his wife to raise herself on her elbow;
the yellow coil of her hair unrolled, fell over his hand and arm. “How
can you tell them apart nurse?”

“Sometimes we cant,” said the nurse, stretching her mouth in a smile.
Susie was looking querulously into the minute purple face. “You’re sure
this is mine.”

“Of course.”

“But it hasnt any label on it.”

“I’ll label it right away.”

“But mine was dark.” Susie lay back on the pillow, gasping for breath.

“She has lovely little light fuzz just the color of your hair.”

Susie stretched her arms out above her head and shrieked: “It’s not
mine. It’s not mine. Take it away.... That woman’s stolen my baby.”

“Dear, for Heaven’s sake! Dear, for Heaven’s sake!” He tried to tuck
the covers about her.

“Too bad,” said the nurse, calmly, picking up the basket. “I’ll have to
give her a sedative.”

Susie sat up stiff in bed. “Take it away,” she yelled and fell back in
hysterics, letting out continuous frail moaning shrieks.

“O my God!” cried Ed Thatcher, clasping his hands.

“You’d better go away for this evening, Mr. Thatcher.... She’ll quiet
down, once you’ve gone.... I’ll put the roses in water.”

On the last flight he caught up with a chubby man who was strolling
down slowly, rubbing his hands as he went. Their eyes met.

“Everything all right, sir?” asked the chubby man.

“Oh yes, I guess so,” said Thatcher faintly.

The chubby man turned on him, delight bubbling through his thick
voice. “Congradulade me, congradulade me; mein vife has giben birth to
a poy.”

Thatcher shook a fat little hand. “Mine’s a girl,” he admitted,
sheepishly.

“It is fif years yet and every year a girl, and now dink of it, a poy.”

“Yes,” said Ed Thatcher as they stepped out on the pavement, “it’s a
great moment.”

“Vill yous allow me sir to invite you to drink a congradulation drink
mit me?”

“Why with pleasure.”

The latticed halfdoors were swinging in the saloon at the corner of
Third Avenue. Shuffling their feet politely they went through into the
back room.

“Ach,” said the German as they sat down at a scarred brown table,
“family life is full of vorries.”

“That it is sir; this is my first.”

“Vill you haf beer?”

“All right anything suits me.”

“Two pottles Culmbacher imported to drink to our little folk.” The
bottles popped and the sepia-tinged foam rose in the glasses. “Here’s
success.... Prosit,” said the German, and raised his glass. He rubbed
the foam out of his mustache and pounded on the table with a pink fist.
“Vould it be indiscreet meester...?”

“Thatcher’s my name.”

“Vould it be indiscreet, Mr. Thatcher, to inquvire vat might your
profession be?”

“Accountant. I hope before long to be a certified accountant.”

“I am a printer and my name is Zucher--Marcus Antonius Zucher.”

“Pleased to meet you Mr. Zucher.”

They shook hands across the table between the bottles.

“A certified accountant makes big money,” said Mr. Zucher.

“Big money’s what I’ll have to have, for my little girl.”

“Kids, they eat money,” continued Mr. Zucher, in a deep voice.

“Wont you let me set you up to a bottle?” said Thatcher, figuring up
how much he had in his pocket. “Poor Susie wouldn’t like me to be
drinking in a saloon like this. But just this once, and I’m learning,
learning about fatherhood.”

“The more the merrier,” said Mr. Zucher. “... But kids, they eat
money.... Dont do nutten but eat and vear out clothes. Vonce I get
my business on its feet.... Ach! Now vot mit hypothecations and the
difficult borrowing of money and vot mit vages going up und these here
crazy tradeunion socialists and bomsters ...”

“Well here’s how, Mr. Zucher.” Mr. Zucher squeezed the foam out of his
mustache with the thumb and forefinger of each hand. “It aint every day
ve pring into the voirld a papy poy, Mr. Thatcher.”

“Or a baby girl, Mr. Zucher.”

The barkeep wiped the spillings off the table when he brought the new
bottles, and stood near listening, the rag dangling from his red hands.

“And I have the hope in mein heart that ven my poy drinks to his poy,
it vill be in champagne vine. Ach, that is how things go in this great
city.”

“I’d like my girl to be a quiet homey girl, not like these young women
nowadays, all frills and furbelows and tight lacings. And I’ll have
retired by that time and have a little place up the Hudson, work in the
garden evenings.... I know fellers downtown who have retired with three
thousand a year. It’s saving that does it.”

“Aint no good in savin,” said the barkeep. “I saved for ten years and
the savings bank went broke and left me nutten but a bankbook for my
trouble. Get a close tip and take a chance, that’s the only system.”

“That’s nothing but gambling,” snapped Thatcher.

“Well sir it’s a gamblin game,” said the barkeep as he walked back to
the bar swinging the two empty bottles.

“A gamblin game. He aint so far out,” said Mr. Zucher, looking down
into his beer with a glassy meditative eye. “A man vat is ambeetious
must take chances. Ambeetions is vat I came here from Frankfort mit at
the age of tvelf years, und now that I haf a son to vork for ... Ach,
his name shall be Vilhelm after the mighty Kaiser.”

“My little girl’s name will be Ellen after my mother.” Ed Thatcher’s
eyes filled with tears.

Mr. Zucher got to his feet. “Vell goodpy Mr. Thatcher. Happy to have
met you. I must go home to my little girls.”

Thatcher shook the chubby hand again, and thinking warm soft thoughts
of motherhood and fatherhood and birthday cakes and Christmas watched
through a sepia-tinged foamy haze Mr. Zucher waddle out through the
swinging doors. After a while he stretched out his arms. Well poor
little Susie wouldn’t like me to be here.... Everything for her and the
bonny wee bairn.

“Hey there yous how about settlin?” bawled the barkeep after him when
he reached the door.

“Didnt the other feller pay?”

“Like hell he did.”

“But he was t-t-treating me....”

The barkeep laughed as he covered the money with a red lipper. “I guess
that bloat believes in savin.”

A small bearded bandylegged man in a derby walked up Allen Street,
up the sunstriped tunnel hung with skyblue and smokedsalmon and
mustardyellow quilts, littered with second hand gingerbread-colored
furniture. He walked with his cold hands clasped over the tails of his
frockcoat, picking his way among packing boxes and scuttling children.
He kept gnawing his lips and clasping and unclasping his hands. He
walked without hearing the yells of the children or the annihilating
clatter of the L trains overhead or smelling the rancid sweet huddled
smell of packed tenements.

At a yellowpainted drugstore at the corner of Canal, he stopped and
stared abstractedly at a face on a green advertising card. It was a
highbrowed cleanshaven distinguished face with arched eyebrows and
a bushy neatly trimmed mustache, the face of a man who had money in
the bank, poised prosperously above a crisp wing collar and an ample
dark cravat. Under it in copybook writing was the signature King C.
Gillette. Above his head hovered the motto NO STROPPING NO HONING. The
little bearded man pushed his derby back off his sweating brow and
looked for a long time into the dollarproud eyes of King C. Gillette.
Then he clenched his fists, threw back his shoulders and walked into
the drugstore.

His wife and daughters were out. He heated up a pitcher of water on the
gasburner. Then with the scissors he found on the mantel he clipped the
long brown locks of his beard. Then he started shaving very carefully
with the new nickelbright safety razor. He stood trembling running his
fingers down his smooth white cheeks in front of the stained mirror. He
was trimming his mustache when he heard a noise behind him. He turned
towards them a face smooth as the face of King C. Gillette, a face with
a dollarbland smile. The two little girls’ eyes were popping out of
their heads. “Mommer ... it’s popper,” the biggest one yelled. His wife
dropped like a laundrybag into the rocker and threw the apron over her
head.

“Oyoy! Oyoy!” she moaned rocking back and forth.

“Vat’s a matter? Dontye like it?” He walked back and forth with the
safety razor shining in his hand now and then gently fingering his
smooth chin.

II. Metropolis

          _There were Babylon and Nineveh: they were built of brick.
          Athens was gold marble columns. Rome was held up on broad
          arches of rubble. In Constantinople the minarets flame like
          great candles round the Golden Horn ... Steel, glass, tile,
          concrete will be the materials of the skyscrapers. Crammed
          on the narrow island the millionwindowed buildings will jut
          glittering, pyramid on pyramid like the white cloudhead
          above a thunderstorm._


When the door of the room closed behind him, Ed Thatcher felt very
lonely, full of prickly restlessness. If Susie were only here he’d
tell her about the big money he was going to make and how he’d deposit
ten dollars a week in the savings bank just for little Ellen; that
would make five hundred and twenty dollars a year.... Why in ten years
without the interest that’d come to more than five thousand dollars. I
must compute the compound interest on five hundred and twenty dollars
at four per cent. He walked excitedly about the narrow room. The gas
jet purred comfortably like a cat. His eyes fell on the headline on a
_Journal_ that lay on the floor by the coalscuttle where he had dropped
it to run for the hack to take Susie to the hospital.
MORTON SIGNS THE GREATER NEW YORK BILL

            COMPLETES THE ACT MAKING NEW YORK WORLD’S SECOND
                               METROPOLIS

Breathing deep he folded the paper and laid it on the table. The
world’s second metropolis.... And dad wanted me to stay in his ole fool
store in Onteora. Might have if it hadnt been for Susie.... Gentlemen
tonight that you do me the signal honor of offering me the junior
partnership in your firm I want to present to you my little girl, my
wife. I owe everything to her.

In the bow he made towards the grate his coat-tails flicked a piece of
china off the console beside the bookcase. He made a little clicking
noise with his tongue against his teeth as he stooped to pick it up.
The head of the blue porcelain Dutch girl had broken off from her body.
“And poor Susie’s so fond of her knicknacks. I’d better go to bed.”

He pushed up the window and leaned out. An L train was rumbling past
the end of the street. A whiff of coal smoke stung his nostrils. He
hung out of the window a long while looking up and down the street. The
world’s second metropolis. In the brick houses and the dingy lamplight
and the voices of a group of boys kidding and quarreling on the steps
of a house opposite, in the regular firm tread of a policeman, he felt
a marching like soldiers, like a sidewheeler going up the Hudson under
the Palisades, like an election parade, through long streets towards
something tall white full of colonnades and stately. Metropolis.

The street was suddenly full of running. Somebody out of breath let out
the word Fire.

“Where at?”

The group of boys melted off the stoop across the way. Thatcher turned
back into the room. It was stifling hot. He was all tingling to be
out. I ought to go to bed. Down the street he heard the splattering
hoofbeats and the frenzied bell of a fire engine. Just take a look. He
ran down the stairs with his hat in his hand.

“Which way is it?”

“Down on the next block.”

“It’s a tenement house.”

It was a narrowwindowed sixstory tenement. The hookandladder had just
drawn up. Brown smoke, with here and there a little trail of sparks
was pouring fast out of the lower windows. Three policemen were
swinging their clubs as they packed the crowd back against the steps
and railings of the houses opposite. In the empty space in the middle
of the street the fire engine and the red hosewagon shone with bright
brass. People watched silent staring at the upper windows where shadows
moved and occasional light flickered. A thin pillar of flame began to
flare above the house like a romancandle.

“The airshaft,” whispered a man in Thatcher’s ear. A gust of wind
filled the street with smoke and a smell of burning rags. Thatcher
felt suddenly sick. When the smoke cleared he saw people hanging in a
kicking cluster, hanging by their hands from a windowledge. The other
side firemen were helping women down a ladder. The flame in the center
of the house flared brighter. Something black had dropped from a window
and lay on the pavement shrieking. The policemen were shoving the crowd
back to the ends of the block. New fire engines were arriving.

“Theyve got five alarms in,” a man said. “What do you think of that?
Everyone of ’em on the two top floors was trapped. It’s an incendiary
done it. Some goddam firebug.”

A young man sat huddled on the curb beside the gas lamp. Thatcher found
himself standing over him pushed by the crowd from behind.

“He’s an Italian.”

“His wife’s in that buildin.”

“Cops wont let him get by.” “His wife’s in a family way. He cant talk
English to ask the cops.”

The man wore blue suspenders tied up with a piece of string in back.
His back was heaving and now and then he left out a string of groaning
words nobody understood.

Thatcher was working his way out of the crowd. At the corner a man was
looking into the fire alarm box. As Thatcher brushed past him he caught
a smell of coaloil from the man’s clothes. The man looked up into his
face with a smile. He had tallowy sagging cheeks and bright popeyes.
Thatcher’s hands and feet went suddenly cold. The firebug. The papers
say they hang round like that to watch it. He walked home fast, ran up
the stairs, and locked the room door behind him. The room was quiet and
empty. He’d forgotten that Susie wouldnt be there waiting for him. He
began to undress. He couldnt forget the smell of coaloil on the man’s
clothes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Perry flicked at the burdock leaves with his cane. The real-estate
agent was pleading in a singsong voice:

“I dont mind telling you, Mr. Perry, it’s an opportunity not to be
missed. You know the old saying sir ... opportunity knocks but once
on a young man’s door. In six months I can virtually guarantee that
these lots will have doubled in value. Now that we are a part of New
York, the second city in the world, sir, dont forget that.... Why the
time will come, and I firmly believe that you and I will see it, when
bridge after bridge spanning the East River have made Long Island and
Manhattan one, when the Borough of Queens will be as much the heart and
throbbing center of the great metropolis as is Astor Place today.”

“I know, I know, but I’m looking for something dead safe. And besides I
want to build. My wife hasnt been very well these last few years....”

“But what could be safer than my proposition? Do you realize Mr.
Perry, that at considerable personal loss I’m letting you in on
the ground floor of one of the greatest real-estate certainties of
modern times. I’m putting at your disposal not only security, but
ease, comfort, luxury. We are caught up Mr. Perry on a great wave
whether we will or no, a great wave of expansion and progress. A great
deal is going to happen in the next few years. All these mechanical
inventions--telephones, electricity, steel bridges, horseless
vehicles--they are all leading somewhere. It’s up to us to be on the
inside, in the forefront of progress.... My God! I cant begin to tell
you what it will mean....” Poking amid the dry grass and the burdock
leaves Mr. Perry had moved something with his stick. He stooped and
picked up a triangular skull with a pair of spiralfluted horns. “By
gad!” he said. “That must have been a fine ram.”

Drowsy from the smell of lather and bayrum and singed hair that weighed
down the close air of the barbershop, Bud sat nodding, his hands
dangling big and red between his knees. In his eardrums he could still
feel through the snipping of scissors the pounding of his feet on the
hungry road down from Nyack.

“Next!”

“Whassat?... All right I just want a shave an a haircut.”

The barber’s pudgy hands moved through his hair, the scissors whirred
like a hornet behind his ears. His eyes kept closing; he jerked them
open fighting sleep. He could see beyond the striped sheet littered
with sandy hair the bobbing hammerhead of the colored boy shining his
shoes.

“Yessir” a deepvoiced man droned from the next chair, “it’s time the
Democratic party nominated a strong ...”

“Want a neckshave as well?” The barber’s greasyskinned moonface poked
into his.

He nodded.

“Shampoo?”

“No.”

When the barber threw back the chair to shave him he wanted to crane
his neck like a mudturtle turned over on its back. The lather spread
drowsily on his face, prickling his nose, filling up his ears. Drowning
in featherbeds of lather, blue lather, black, slit by the faraway
glint of the razor, glint of the grubbing hoe through blueblack lather
clouds. The old man on his back in the potatofield, his beard sticking
up lathery white full of blood. Full of blood his socks from those
blisters on his heels. His hands gripped each other cold and horny like
a dead man’s hands under the sheet. Lemme git up.... He opened his
eyes. Padded fingertips were stroking his chin. He stared up at the
ceiling where four flies made figure eights round a red crêpe-paper
bell. His tongue was dry leather in his mouth. The barber righted the
chair again. Bud looked about blinking. “Four bits, and a nickel for
the shine.”

ADMITS KILLING CRIPPLED MOTHER ...

“D’yous mind if I set here a minute an read that paper?” he hears his
voice drawling in his pounding ears.

“Go right ahead.”

PARKER’S FRIENDS PROTECT ...

The black print squirms before his eyes. Russians ... MOB STONES ...
(Special Dispatch to the _Herald_) Trenton, N. J.

     Nathan Sibbetts, fourteen years old, broke down today after
     two weeks of steady denial of guilt and confessed to the
     police that he was responsible for the death of his aged
     and crippled mother, Hannah Sibbetts, after a quarrel in
     their home at Jacob’s Creek, six miles above this city.
     Tonight he was committed to await the action of the Grand
     Jury.

RELIEVE PORT ARTHUR IN FACE OF ENEMY ... Mrs. Rix Loses Husband’s Ashes.

     On Tuesday May 24 at about half past eight o’clock I came
     home after sleeping on the steam roller all night, he said,
     and went upstairs to sleep some more. I had only gotten to
     sleep when my mother came upstairs and told me to get up
     and if I didn’t get up she would throw me downstairs. My
     mother grabbed hold of me to throw me downstairs. I threw
     her first and she fell to the bottom. I went downstairs
     and found that her head was twisted to one side. I then
     saw that she was dead and then I straightened her neck and
     covered her up with the cover from my bed.

Bud folds the paper carefully, lays it on the chair and leaves the
barbershop. Outside the air smells of crowds, is full of noise and
sunlight. No more’n a needle in a haystack ... “An I’m twentyfive years
old,” he muttered aloud. Think of a kid fourteen.... He walks faster
along roaring pavements where the sun shines through the Elevated
striping the blue street with warm seething yellow stripes. No more’n a
needle in a haystack.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ed Thatcher sat hunched over the pianokeys picking out the Mosquito
Parade. Sunday afternoon sunlight streamed dustily through the heavy
lace curtains of the window, squirmed in the red roses of the carpet,
filled the cluttered parlor with specks and splinters of light. Susie
Thatcher sat limp by the window watching him out of eyes too blue for
her sallow face. Between them, stepping carefully among the roses on
the sunny field of the carpet, little Ellen danced. Two small hands
held up the pinkfrilled dress and now and then an emphatic little voice
said, “Mummy watch my expression.”

“Just look at the child,” said Thatcher, still playing. “She’s a
regular little balletdancer.”

Sheets of the Sunday paper lay where they had fallen from the table;
Ellen started dancing on them, tearing the sheets under her nimble tiny
feet.

“Dont do that Ellen dear,” whined Susie from the pink plush chair.

“But mummy I can do it while I dance.”

“Dont do that mother said.” Ed Thatcher had slid into the Barcarole.
Ellen was dancing to it, her arms swaying to it, her feet nimbly
tearing the paper.

“Ed for Heaven’s sake pick the child up; she’s tearing the paper.”

He brought his fingers down in a lingering chord. “Deary you mustnt do
that. Daddy’s not finished reading it.”

Ellen went right on. Thatcher swooped down on her from the pianostool
and set her squirming and laughing on his knee. “Ellen you should
always mind when mummy speaks to you, and dear you shouldnt be
destructive. It costs money to make that paper and people worked on
it and daddy went out to buy it and he hasnt finished reading it
yet. Ellie understands dont she now? We need con-struction and not
de-struction in this world.” Then he went on with the Barcarole and
Ellen went on dancing, stepping carefully among the roses on the sunny
field of the carpet.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were six men at the table in the lunch room eating fast with
their hats on the backs of their heads.

“Jiminy crickets!” cried the young man at the end of the table who was
holding a newspaper in one hand and a cup of coffee in the other. “Kin
you beat it?”

“Beat what?” growled a longfaced man with a toothpick in the corner of
his mouth.

“Big snake appears on Fifth Avenue.... Ladies screamed and ran in all
directions this morning at eleven thirty when a big snake crawled
out of a crack in the masonry of the retaining wall of the reservoir
at Fifth Avenue and Fortysecond Street and started to cross the
sidewalk....”

“Some fish story....”

“That aint nothin,” said an old man. “When I was a boy we used to go
snipeshootin on Brooklyn Flats....”

“Holy Moses! it’s quarter of nine,” muttered the young man folding
his paper and hurrying out into Hudson Street that was full of men
and girls walking briskly through the ruddy morning. The scrape of
the shoes of hairyhoofed drayhorses and the grind of the wheels of
producewagons made a deafening clatter and filled the air with sharp
dust. A girl in a flowered bonnet with a big lavender bow under her
pert tilted chin was waiting for him in the door of M. Sullivan & Co.,
Storage and Warehousing. The young man felt all fizzy inside, like a
freshly uncorked bottle of pop.

“Hello Emily!... Say Emily I’ve got a raise.”

“You’re pretty near late, d’you know that?”

“But honest injun I’ve got a two-dollar raise.”

She tilted her chin first to oneside and then to the other.

“I dont give a rap.”

“You know what you said if I got a raise.” She looked in his eyes
giggling.

“An this is just the beginnin ...”

“But what good’s fifteen dollars a week?”

“Why it’s sixty dollars a month, an I’m learning the import business.”

“Silly boy you’ll be late.” She suddenly turned and ran up the littered
stairs, her pleated bellshaped skirt swishing from side to side.

“God! I hate her. I hate her.” Sniffing up the tears that were hot in
his eyes, he walked fast down Hudson Street to the office of Winkle &
Gulick, West India Importers.

       *       *       *       *       *

The deck beside the forward winch was warm and briny damp. They were
sprawled side by side in greasy denims talking drowsily in whispers,
their ears full of the seethe of broken water as the bow shoved bluntly
through the long grassgray swells of the Gulf Stream.

“J’te dis mon vieux, moi j’fou l’camp à New York.... The minute we
tie up I go ashore and I stay ashore. I’m through with this dog’s
life.” The cabinboy had fair hair and an oval pink-and-cream face; a
dead cigarette butt fell from between his lips as he spoke. “Merde!”
He reached for it as it rolled down the deck. It escaped his hand and
bounced into the scuppers.

“Let it go. I’ve got plenty,” said the other boy who lay on his belly
kicking a pair of dirty feet up into the hazy sunlight. “The consul
will just have you shipped back.”

“He wont catch me.”

“And your military service?”

“To hell with it. And with France too for that matter.”

“You want to make yourself an American citizen?”

“Why not? A man has a right to choose his country.”

The other rubbed his nose meditatively with his fist and then let his
breath out in a long whistle. “Emile you’re a wise guy,” he said.

“But Congo, why dont you come too? You dont want to shovel crap in a
stinking ship’s galley all your life.”

Congo rolled himself round and sat up crosslegged, scratching his head
that was thick with kinky black hair.

“Say how much does a woman cost in New York?”

“I dunno, expensive I guess.... I’m not going ashore to raise hell; I’m
going to get a good job and work. Cant you think of nothing but women?”

“What’s the use? Why not?” said Congo and settled himself flat on the
deck again, burying his dark sootsmudged face in his crossed arms.

“I want to get somewhere in the world, that’s what I mean. Europe’s
rotten and stinking. In America a fellow can get ahead. Birth dont
matter, education dont matter. It’s all getting ahead.”

“And if there was a nice passionate little woman right here now where
the deck’s warm, you wouldn’t like to love her up?”

“After we’re rich, we’ll have plenty, plenty of everything.”

“And they dont have any military service?”

“Why should they? Its the coin they’re after. They dont want to fight
people; they want to do business with them.”

Congo did not answer.

The cabin boy lay on his back looking at the clouds. They floated from
the west, great piled edifices with the sunlight crashing through
between, bright and white like tinfoil. He was walking through tall
white highpiled streets, stalking in a frock coat with a tall white
collar up tinfoil stairs, broad, cleanswept, through blue portals into
streaky marble halls where money rustled and clinked on long tinfoil
tables, banknotes, silver, gold.

“Merde v’là l’heure.” The paired strokes of the bell in the crowsnest
came faintly to their ears. “But dont forget, Congo, the first night we
get ashore ...” He made a popping noise with his lips. “We’re gone.”

“I was asleep. I dreamed of a little blonde girl. I’d have had her if
you hadnt waked me.” The cabinboy got to his feet with a grunt and
stood a moment looking west to where the swells ended in a sharp wavy
line against a sky hard and abrupt as nickel. Then he pushed Congo’s
face down against the deck and ran aft, the wooden clogs clattering on
his bare feet as he went.

       *       *       *       *       *

Outside, the hot June Saturday was dragging its frazzled ends down
110th Street. Susie Thatcher lay uneasily in bed, her hands spread
blue and bony on the coverlet before her. Voices came through the thin
partition. A young girl was crying through her nose:

“I tell yer mommer I aint agoin back to him.”

Then came expostulating an old staid Jewish woman’s voice: “But Rosie,
married life aint all beer and skittles. A vife must submit and vork
for her husband.”

“I wont. I cant help it. I wont go back to the dirty brute.”

Susie sat up in bed, but she couldn’t hear the next thing the old woman
said.

“But I aint a Jew no more,” suddenly screeched the young girl. “This
aint Russia; it’s little old New York. A girl’s got some rights here.”
Then a door slammed and everything was quiet.

Susie Thatcher stirred in bed moaning fretfully. Those awful people
never give me a moment’s peace. From below came the jingle of a
pianola playing the Merry Widow Waltz. O Lord! why dont Ed come home?
It’s cruel of them to leave a sick woman alone like this. Selfish.
She twisted up her mouth and began to cry. Then she lay quiet again,
staring at the ceiling watching the flies buzz teasingly round the
electriclight fixture. A wagon clattered by down the street. She could
hear children’s voices screeching. A boy passed yelling an extra.
Suppose there’d been a fire. That terrible Chicago theater fire. Oh
I’ll go mad! She tossed about in the bed, her pointed nails digging
into the palms of her hands. I’ll take another tablet. Maybe I can get
some sleep. She raised herself on her elbow and took the last tablet
out of a little tin box. The gulp of water that washed the tablet down
was soothing to her throat. She closed her eyes and lay quiet.

She woke with a start. Ellen was jumping round the room, her green tam
falling off the back of her head, her coppery curls wild.

“Oh mummy I want to be a little boy.”

“Quieter dear. Mother’s not feeling a bit well.”

“I want to be a little boy.”

“Why Ed what have you done to the child? She’s all wrought up.”

“We’re just excited, Susie. We’ve been to the most wonderful play.
You’d have loved it, it’s so poetic and all that sort of thing. And
Maude Adams was fine. Ellie loved every minute of it.”

“It seems silly, as I said before, to take such a young child ...”

“Oh daddy I want to be a boy.”

“I like my little girl the way she is. We’ll have to go again Susie and
take you.”

“Ed you know very well I wont be well enough.” She sat bolt upright,
her hair hanging a straight faded yellow down her back. “Oh, I wish I’d
die ... I wish I’d die, and not be a burden to you any more.... You
hate me both of you. If you didnt hate me you wouldnt leave me alone
like this.” She choked and put her face in her hands. “Oh I wish I’d
die,” she sobbed through her fingers.

“Now Susie for Heaven’s sakes, it’s wicked to talk like that.” He put
his arm round her and sat on the bed beside her.

Crying quietly she dropped her head on his shoulder. Ellen stood
staring at them out of round gray eyes. Then she started jumping up and
down, chanting to herself, “Ellie’s goin to be a boy, Ellie’s goin to
be a boy.”

       *       *       *       *       *

With a long slow stride, limping a little from his blistered feet, Bud
walked down Broadway, past empty lots where tin cans glittered among
grass and sumach bushes and ragweed, between ranks of billboards and
Bull Durham signs, past shanties and abandoned squatters’ shacks,
past gulches heaped with wheelscarred rubbishpiles where dumpcarts
were dumping ashes and clinkers, past knobs of gray outcrop where
steamdrills continually tapped and nibbled, past excavations out of
which wagons full of rock and clay toiled up plank roads to the
street, until he was walking on new sidewalks along a row of yellow
brick apartment houses, looking in the windows of grocery stores,
Chinese laundries, lunchrooms, flower and vegetable shops, tailors’,
delicatessens. Passing under a scaffolding in front of a new building,
he caught the eye of an old man who sat on the edge of the sidewalk
trimming oil lamps. Bud stood beside him, hitching up his pants;
cleared his throat:

“Say mister you couldnt tell a feller where a good place was to look
for a job?”

“Aint no good place to look for a job, young feller.... There’s jobs
all right.... I’ll be sixty-five years old in a month and four days an
I’ve worked sence I was five I reckon, an I aint found a good job yet.”

“Anything that’s a job’ll do me.”

“Got a union card?”

“I aint got nothin.”

“Cant git no job in the buildin trades without a union card,” said
the old man. He rubbed the gray bristles of his chin with the back
of his hand and leaned over the lamps again. Bud stood staring into
the dustreeking girder forest of the new building until he found the
eyes of a man in a derby hat fixed on him through the window of the
watchman’s shelter. He shuffled his feet uneasily and walked on. If I
could git more into the center of things....

At the next corner a crowd was collecting round a highslung white
automobile. Clouds of steam poured out of its rear end. A policeman was
holding up a small boy by the armpits. From the car a redfaced man with
white walrus whiskers was talking angrily.

“I tell you officer he threw a stone.... This sort of thing has got to
stop. For an officer to countenance hoodlums and rowdies....”

A woman with her hair done up in a tight bunch on top of her head was
screaming, shaking her fist at the man in the car, “Officer he near run
me down he did, he near run me down.”

Bud edged up next to a young man in a butcher’s apron who had a
baseball cap on backwards.

“Wassa matter?”

“Hell I dunno.... One o them automoebile riots I guess. Aint you read
the paper? I dont blame em do you? What right have those golblamed
automoebiles got racin round the city knockin down wimen an children?”

“Gosh do they do that?”

“Sure they do.”

“Say ... er ... kin you tell me about where’s a good place to find out
about gettin a job?” The butcherboy threw back head and laughed.

“Kerist I thought you was goin to ask for a handout.... I guess you
aint a Newyorker.... I’ll tell you what to do. You keep right on down
Broadway till you get to City Hall....”

“Is that kinder the center of things?”

“Sure it is.... An then you go upstairs and ask the Mayor.... Tell me
there are some seats on the board of aldermen ...”

“Like hell they are,” growled Bud and walked away fast.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Roll ye babies ... roll ye lobsided sons o bitches.”

“That’s it talk to em Slats.”

“Come seven!” Slats shot the bones out of his hand, brought the thumb
along his sweaty fingers with a snap. “Aw hell.”

“You’re some great crapshooter I’ll say, Slats.”

Dirty hands added each a nickel to the pile in the center of the circle
of patched knees stuck forward. The five boys were sitting on their
heels under a lamp on South Street.

“Come on girlies we’re waitin for it.... Roll ye little bastards,
goddam ye, roll.”

“Cheeze it fellers! There’s Big Leonard an his gang acomin down the
block.”

“I’d knock his block off for a ...”

Four of them were already slouching off along the wharf, gradually
scattering without looking back. The smallest boy with a chinless face
shaped like a beak stayed behind quietly picking up the coins. Then he
ran along the wall and vanished into the dark passageway between two
houses. He flattened himself behind a chimney and waited. The confused
voices of the gang broke into the passageway; then they had gone on
down the street. The boy was counting the nickels in his hand. Ten.
“Jez, that’s fifty cents.... I’ll tell ’em Big Leonard scooped up the
dough.” His pockets had no bottoms, so he tied the nickels into one of
his shirt tails.

       *       *       *       *       *

A goblet for Rhine wine hobnobbed with a champagne glass at each
place along the glittering white oval table. On eight glossy white
plates eight canapés of caviar were like rounds of black beads on the
lettuceleaves, flanked by sections of lemon, sprinkled with a sparse
chopping of onion and white of egg. “Beaucoup de soing and dont you
forget it,” said the old waiter puckering up his knobbly forehead. He
was a short waddling man with a few black strands of hair plastered
tight across a domed skull.

“Awright.” Emile nodded his head gravely. His collar was too tight for
him. He was shaking a last bottle of champagne into the nickelbound
bucket of ice on the serving-table.

“Beaucoup de soing, sporca madonna.... Thisa guy trows money about lika
confetti, see.... Gives tips, see. He’s a verra rich gentleman. He dont
care how much he spend.” Emile patted the crease of the tablecloth to
flatten it. “Fais pas, como, ça.... Your hand’s dirty, maybe leava
mark.”

Resting first on one foot then on the other they stood waiting, their
napkins under their arms. From the restaurant below among the buttery
smells of food and the tinkle of knives and forks and plates, came the
softly gyrating sound of a waltz.

When he saw the headwaiter bow outside the door Emile compressed his
lips into a deferential smile. There was a longtoothed blond woman in
a salmon operacloak swishing on the arm of a moonfaced man who carried
his top hat ahead of him like a bumper; there was a little curlyhaired
girl in blue who was showing her teeth and laughing, a stout woman in a
tiara with a black velvet ribbon round her neck, a bottlenose, a long
cigarcolored face ... shirtfronts, hands straightening white ties,
black gleams on top hats and patent leather shoes; there was a weazlish
man with gold teeth who kept waving his arms spitting out greetings in
a voice like a crow’s and wore a diamond the size of a nickel in his
shirtfront. The redhaired cloakroom girl was collecting the wraps. The
old waiter nudged Emile. “He’s de big boss,” he said out of the corner
of his mouth as he bowed. Emile flattened himself against the wall as
they shuffled rustled into the room. A whiff of patchouli when he drew
his breath made him go suddenly hot to the roots of his hair.

“But where’s Fifi Waters?” shouted the man with the diamond stud.

“She said she couldnt get here for a half an hour. I guess the Johnnies
wont let her get by the stage door.”

“Well we cant wait for her even if it is her birthday; never waited for
anyone in my life.” He stood a second running a roving eye over the
women round the table, then shot his cuffs out a little further from
the sleeves of his swallowtail coat, and abruptly sat down. The caviar
vanished in a twinkling. “And waiter what about that Rhine wine coupe?”
he croaked huskily. “De suite monsieur....” Emile holding his breath
and sucking in his cheeks, was taking away the plates. A frost came on
the goblets as the old waiter poured out the coupe from a cut glass
pitcher where floated mint and ice and lemon rind and long slivvers of
cucumber.

“Aha, this’ll do the trick.” The man with the diamond stud raised his
glass to his lips, smacked them and set it down with a slanting look
at the woman next him. She was putting dabs of butter on bits of bread
and popping them into her mouth, muttering all the while:

“I can only eat the merest snack, only the merest snack.”

“That dont keep you from drinkin Mary does it?”

She let out a cackling laugh and tapped him on the shoulder with her
closed fan. “O Lord, you’re a card, you are.”

“Allume moi ça, sporca madonna,” hissed the old waiter in Emile’s ear.

When he lit the lamps under the two chafing dishes on the serving table
a smell of hot sherry and cream and lobster began to seep into the
room. The air was hot, full of tinkle and perfume and smoke. After he
had helped serve the lobster Newburg and refilled the glasses Emile
leaned against the wall and ran his hand over his wet hair. His eyes
slid along the plump shoulders of the woman in front of him and down
the powdered back to where a tiny silver hook had come undone under the
lace rushing. The baldheaded man next to her had his leg locked with
hers. She was young, Emile’s age, and kept looking up into the man’s
face with moist parted lips. It made Emile dizzy, but he couldn’t stop
looking.

“But what’s happened to the fair Fifi?” creaked the man with the
diamond stud through a mouthful of lobster. “I suppose that she made
such a hit again this evening that our simple little party dont appeal
to her.”

“It’s enough to turn any girl’s head.”

“Well she’ll get the surprise of her young life if she expected us to
wait. Haw, haw, haw,” laughed the man with the diamond stud. “I never
waited for anybody in my life and I’m not going to begin now.”

Down the table the moonfaced man had pushed back his plate and was
playing with the bracelet on the wrist of the woman beside him. “You’re
the perfect Gibson girl tonight, Olga.”

“I’m sitting for my portrait now,” she said holding up her goblet
against the light.

“To Gibson?”

“No to a real painter.”

“By Gad I’ll buy it.”

“Maybe you wont have a chance.”

She nodded her blond pompadour at him.

“You’re a wicked little tease, Olga.”

She laughed keeping her lips tight over her long teeth.

A man was leaning towards the man with the diamond stud, tapping with a
stubby finger on the table.

“No sir as a real estate proposition, Twentythird Street has
crashed.... That’s generally admitted.... But what I want to talk to
you about privately sometime Mr. Godalming, is this.... How’s all
the big money in New York been made? Astor, Vanderbilt, Fish.... In
real estate of course. Now it’s up to us to get in on the next great
clean-up.... It’s almost here.... Buy Forty....”

The man with the diamond stud raised one eyebrow and shook his head.
“For one night on Beauty’s lap, O put gross care away ... or something
of the sort.... Waiter why in holy hell are you so long with the
champagne?” He got to his feet, coughed in his hand and began to sing
in his croaking voice:

    O would the Atlantic were all champagne
    Bright billows of champagne.

Everybody clapped. The old waiter had just divided a baked Alaska and,
his face like a beet, was prying out a stiff champagnecork. When the
cork popped the lady in the tiara let out a yell. They toasted the man
in the diamond stud.

    For he’s a jolly good fellow ...

“Now what kind of a dish d’ye call this?” the man with the bottlenose
leaned over and asked the girl next to him. Her black hair parted in
the middle; she wore a palegreen dress with puffy sleeves. He winked
slowly and then stared hard into her black eyes.

“This here’s the fanciest cookin I ever put in my mouth.... D’ye
know young leddy, I dont come to this town often....” He gulped
down the rest of his glass. “An when I do I usually go away kinder
disgusted....” His look bright and feverish from the champagne explored
the contours of her neck and shoulders and roamed down a bare arm. “But
this time I kinder think....”

“It must be a great life prospecting,” she interrupted flushing.

“It was a great life in the old days, a rough life but a man’s life....
I’m glad I made my pile in the old days.... Wouldnt have the same luck
now.”

She looked up at him. “How modest you are to call it luck.”

Emile was standing outside the door of the private room. There was
nothing more to serve. The redhaired girl from the cloakroom walked by
with a big flounced cape on her arm. He smiled, tried to catch her eye.
She sniffed and tossed her nose in the air. Wont look at me because I’m
a waiter. When I make some money I’ll show ’em.

“Dis; tella Charlie two more bottle Moet and Chandon, Gout Americain,”
came the old waiter’s hissing voice in his ear.

The moonfaced man was on his feet. “Ladies and Gentlemen....”

“Silence in the pigsty ...” piped up a voice.

“The big sow wants to talk,” said Olga under her breath.

“Ladies and gentlemen owing to the unfortunate absence of our star of
Bethlehem and fulltime act....”

“Gilly dont blaspheme,” said the lady with the tiara.

“Ladies and gentlemen, unaccustomed as I am....”

“Gilly you’re drunk.”

“... Whether the tide ... I mean whether the waters be with us or
against us...”

Somebody yanked at his coat-tails and the moonfaced man sat down
suddenly in his chair.

“It’s terrible,” said the lady in the tiara addressing herself to a
man with a long face the color of tobacco who sat at the end of the
table ... “It’s terrible, Colonel, the way Gilly gets blasphemous when
he’s been drinking...”

The Colonel was meticulously rolling the tinfoil off a cigar. “Dear me,
you dont say?” he drawled. Above the bristly gray mustache his face was
expressionless. “There’s a most dreadful story about poor old Atkins,
Elliott Atkins who used to be with Mansfield...”

“Indeed?” said the Colonel icily as he slit the end of the cigar with a
small pearlhandled penknife.

“Say Chester did you hear that Mabie Evans was making a hit?”

“Honestly Olga I dont see how she does it. She has no figure...”

“Well he made a speech, drunk as a lord you understand, one night when
they were barnstorming in Kansas...”

“She cant sing...”

“The poor fellow never did go very strong in the bright lights...”

“She hasnt the slightest particle of figure...”

“And made a sort of Bob Ingersoll speech...”

“The dear old feller.... Ah I knew him well out in Chicago in the old
days...”

“You dont say.” The Colonel held a lighted match carefully to the end
of his cigar...

“And there was a terrible flash of lightning and a ball of fire came in
one window and went out the other.”

“Was he ... er ... killed?” The Colonel sent a blue puff of smoke
towards the ceiling.

“What, did you say Bob Ingersoll had been struck by lightning?” cried
Olga shrilly. “Serve him right the horrid atheist.”

“No not exactly, but it scared him into a realization of the important
things of life and now he’s joined the Methodist church.”

“Funny how many actors get to be ministers.”

“Cant get an audience any other way,” creaked the man with the diamond
stud.

The two waiters hovered outside the door listening to the racket
inside. “Tas de sacrés cochons ... sporca madonna!” hissed the old
waiter. Emile shrugged his shoulders. “That brunette girl make eyes at
you all night...” He brought his face near Emile’s and winked. “Sure,
maybe you pick up somethin good.”

“I dont want any of them or their dirty diseases either.”

The old waiter slapped his thigh. “No young men nowadays.... When I was
young man I take heap o chances.”

“They dont even look at you ...” said Emile through clenched teeth. “An
animated dress suit that’s all.”

“Wait a minute, you learn by and by.”

The door opened. They bowed respectfully towards the diamond stud.
Somebody had drawn a pair of woman’s legs on his shirtfront. There was
a bright flush on each of his cheeks. The lower lid of one eye sagged,
giving his weasle face a quizzical lobsided look.

“Wazzahell, Marco wazzahell?” he was muttering. “We aint got a thing to
drink.... Bring the Atlantic Ozz-shen and two quarts.”

“De suite monsieur....” The old waiter bowed. “Emile tell Auguste,
immediatement et bien frappé.”

As Emile went down the corridor he could hear singing.

    O would the Atlantic were all champagne
    Bright bi-i-i....

The moonface and the bottlenose were coming back from the lavatory
reeling arm in arm among the palms in the hall.

“These damn fools make me sick.”

“Yessir these aint the champagne suppers we used to have in Frisco in
the ole days.”

“Ah those were great days those.”

“By the way,” the moonfaced man steadied himself against the wall,
“Holyoke ole fella, did you shee that very nobby little article on
the rubber trade I got into the morning papers.... That’ll make the
investors nibble ... like lil mishe.”

“Whash you know about rubber?... The stuff aint no good.”

“You wait an shee, Holyoke ole fella or you looshing opportunity of
your life.... Drunk or sober I can smell money ... on the wind.”

“Why aint you got any then?” The bottlenosed man’s beefred face went
purple; he doubled up letting out great hoots of laughter.

“Because I always let my friends in on my tips,” said the other man
soberly. “Hay boy where’s zis here private dinin room?”

“Par ici monsieur.”

A red accordionpleated dress swirled past them, a little oval face
framed by brown flat curls, pearly teeth in an open-mouthed laugh.

“Fifi Waters,” everyone shouted. “Why my darlin lil Fifi, come to my
arms.”

She was lifted onto a chair where she stood jiggling from one foot to
the other, champagne dripping out of a tipped glass.

“Merry Christmas.”

“Happy New Year.”

“Many returns of the day....”

A fair young man who had followed her in was reeling intricately round
the table singing:

    O we went to the animals’ fair
    And the birds and the beasts were there
    And the big baboon
    By the light of the moon
    Was combing his auburn hair.

“Hoopla,” cried Fifi Waters and mussed the gray hair of the man with
the diamond stud. “Hoopla.” She jumped down with a kick, pranced round
the room, kicking high with her skirts fluffed up round her knees.

“Oh la la ze French high kicker!”

“Look out for the Pony Ballet.”

Her slender legs, shiny black silk stockings tapering to red rosetted
slippers flashed in the men’s faces.

“She’s a mad thing,” cried the lady in the tiara.

Hoopla. Holyoke was swaying in the doorway with his top hat tilted over
the glowing bulb of his nose. She let out a whoop and kicked it off.

“It’s a goal,” everyone cried.

“For crissake you kicked me in the eye.”

She stared at him a second with round eyes and then burst into tears
on the broad shirtfront of the diamond stud. “I wont be insulted like
that,” she sobbed.

“Rub the other eye.”

“Get a bandage someone.”

“Goddam it she may have put his eye out.”

“Call a cab there waiter.”

“Where’s a doctor?”

“That’s hell to pay ole fella.”

A handkerchief full of tears and blood pressed to his eye the
bottlenosed man stumbled out. The men and women crowded through the
door after him; last went the blond young man, reeling and singing:

    An the big baboon by the light of the moon
    Was combing his auburn hair.

Fifi Waters was sobbing with her head on the table.

“Dont cry Fifi,” said the Colonel who was still sitting where he had
sat all the evening. “Here’s something I rather fancy might do you
good.” He pushed a glass of champagne towards her down the table.

She sniffled and began drinking it in little sips. “Hullo Roger, how’s
the boy?”

“The boy’s quite well thank you.... Rather bored, dont you know? An
evening with such infernal bounders....”

“I’m hungry.”

“There doesnt seem to be anything left to eat.”

“I didnt know you’d be here or I’d have come earlier, honest.”

“Would you indeed?... Now that’s very nice.”

The long ash dropped from the Colonel’s cigar; he got to his feet. “Now
Fifi, I’ll call a cab and we’ll go for a ride in the Park....”

She drank down her champagne and nodded brightly. “Dear me it’s four
o’clock....” “You have the proper wraps haven’t you?”

She nodded again.

“Splendid Fifi ... I say you are in form.” The Colonel’s cigarcolored
face was unraveling in smiles. “Well, come along.”

She looked about her in a dazed way. “Didnt I come with somebody?”

“Quite unnecessary!”

In the hall they came upon the fair young man quietly vomiting into a
firebucket under an artificial palm.

“Oh let’s leave him,” she said wrinkling up her nose.

“Quite unnecessary,” said the Colonel.

Emile brought their wraps. The redhaired girl had gone home.

“Look here, boy.” The Colonel waved his cane. “Call me a cab please....
Be sure the horse is decent and the driver is sober.”

“De suite monsieur.”

The sky beyond roofs and chimneys was the blue of a sapphire. The
Colonel took three or four deep sniffs of the dawnsmelling air and
threw his cigar into the gutter. “Suppose we have a bit of breakfast at
Cleremont. I haven’t had anything fit to eat all night. That beastly
sweet champagne, ugh!”

Fifi giggled. After the Colonel had examined the horse’s fetlocks and
patted his head, they climbed into the cab. The Colonel fitted in Fifi
carefully under his arm and they drove off. Emile stood a second in the
door of the restaurant uncrumpling a five dollar bill. He was tired and
his insteps ached.

When Emile came out of the back door of the restaurant he found Congo
waiting for him sitting on the doorstep. Congo’s skin had a green
chilly look under the frayed turned up coatcollar.

“This is my friend,” Emile said to Marco. “Came over on the same boat.”

“You havent a bottle of fine under your coat have you? Sapristi I’ve
seen some chickens not half bad come out of this place.”

“But what’s the matter?”

“Lost my job that’s all.... I wont have to take any more off that guy.
Come over and drink a coffee.”

They ordered coffee and doughnuts in a lunchwagon on a vacant lot.

“Eh bien you like it this sacred pig of a country?” asked Marco.

“Why not? I like it anywhere. It’s all the same, in France you are paid
badly and live well; here you are paid well and live badly.”

“Questo paese e completamente soto sopra.”

“I think I’ll go to sea again....”

“Say why de hell doan yous guys loin English?” said the man with a
cauliflower face who slapped the three mugs of coffee down on the
counter.

“If we talk Engleesh,” snapped Marco “maybe you no lika what we say.”

“Why did they fire you?”

“Merde. I dont know. I had an argument with the old camel who runs
the place.... He lived next door to the stables; as well as washing
the carriages he made me scrub the floors in his house.... His wife,
she had a face like this.” Congo sucked in his lips and tried to look
crosseyed.

Marco laughed. “Santissima Maria putana!”

“How did you talk to them?”

“They pointed to things; then I nodded my head and said Awright. I went
there at eight and worked till six and they gave me every day more
filthy things to do.... Last night they tell me to clean out the toilet
in the bathroom. I shook my head.... That’s woman’s work.... She got
very angry and started screeching. Then I began to learn Angleesh....
Go awright to ’ell, I says to her.... Then the old man comes and chases
me out into a street with a carriage whip and says he wont pay me my
week.... While we were arguing he got a policeman, and when I try to
explain to the policeman that the old man owed me ten dollars for the
week, he says Beat it you lousy wop, and cracks me on the coco with his
nightstick.... Merde alors...”

Marco was red in the face. “He call you lousy wop?”

Congo nodded his mouth full of doughnut.

“Notten but shanty Irish himself,” muttered Marco in English. “I’m fed
up with this rotten town....

“It’s the same all over the world, the police beating us up, rich
people cheating us out of their starvation wages, and who’s fault?...
Dio cane! Your fault, my fault, Emile’s fault....”

“We didn’t make the world.... They did or maybe God did.”

“God’s on their side, like a policeman.... When the day comes we’ll
kill God.... I am an anarchist.”

Congo hummed “les bourgeois à la lanterne nom de dieu.”

“Are you one of us?”

Congo shrugged his shoulders. “I’m not a catholic or a protestant;
I haven’t any money and I haven’t any work. Look at that.” Congo
pointed with a dirty finger to a long rip on his trouserknee. “That’s
anarchist.... Hell I’m going out to Senegal and get to be a nigger.”

“You look like one already,” laughed Emile.

“That’s why they call me Congo.”

“But that’s all silly,” went on Emile. “People are all the same. It’s
only that some people get ahead and others dont.... That’s why I came
to New York.”

“Dio cane I think that too twentyfive years ago.... When you’re old
like me you know better. Doesnt the shame of it get you sometimes?
Here” ... he tapped with his knuckles on his stiff shirtfront.... “I
feel it hot and like choking me here.... Then I say to myself Courage
our day is coming, our day of blood.”
“I say to myself,” said Emile “When you have some money old kid.”

“Listen, before I leave Torino when I go last time to see the mama I go
to a meetin of comrades.... A fellow from Capua got up to speak ... a
very handsome man, tall and very thin.... He said that there would be
no more force when after the revolution nobody lived off another man’s
work.... Police, governments, armies, presidents, kings ... all that
is force. Force is not real; it is illusion. The working man makes all
that himself because he believes it. The day that we stop believing in
money and property it will be like a dream when we wake up. We will not
need bombs or barricades.... Religion, politics, democracy all that is
to keep us asleep.... Everybody must go round telling people: Wake up!”

“When you go down into the street I’ll be with you,” said Congo.

“You know that man I tell about?... That man Errico Malatesta, in Italy
greatest man after Garibaldi.... He give his whole life in jail and
exile, in Egypt, in England, in South America, everywhere.... If I
could be a man like that, I dont care what they do; they can string me
up, shoot me ... I dont care ... I am very happy.”

“But he must be crazy a feller like that,” said Emile slowly. “He must
be crazy.”

Marco gulped down the last of his coffee. “Wait a minute. You are too
young. You will understand.... One by one they make us understand....
And remember what I say.... Maybe I’m too old, maybe I’m dead, but it
will come when the working people awake from slavery.... You will walk
out in the street and the police will run away, you will go into a bank
and there will be money poured out on the floor and you wont stoop
to pick it up, no more good.... All over the world we are preparing.
There are comrades even in China.... Your Commune in France was the
beginning ... socialism failed. It’s for the anarchists to strike the
next blow.... If we fail there will be others....”

Congo yawned, “I am sleepy as a dog.”

Outside the lemoncolored dawn was drenching the empty streets,
dripping from cornices, from the rails of fire escapes, from the rims
of ashcans, shattering the blocks of shadow between buildings. The
streetlights were out. At a corner they looked up Broadway that was
narrow and scorched as if a fire had gutted it.

“I never see the dawn,” said Marco, his voice rattling in his throat,
“that I dont say to myself perhaps ... perhaps today.” He cleared his
throat and spat against the base of a lamppost; then he moved away from
them with his waddling step, taking hard short sniffs of the cool air.

“Is that true, Congo, about shipping again?”

“Why not? Got to see the world a bit...”

“I’ll miss you.... I’ll have to find another room.”

“You’ll find another friend to bunk with.”

“But if you do that you’ll stay a sailor all your life.”

“What does it matter? When you are rich and married I’ll come and visit
you.”

They were walking down Sixth Avenue. An L train roared above their
heads leaving a humming rattle to fade among the girders after it had
passed.

“Why dont you get another job and stay on a while?”

Congo produced two bent cigarettes out of the breast pocket of his
coat, handed one to Emile, struck a match on the seat of his trousers,
and let the smoke out slowly through his nose. “I’m fed up with it
here I tell you....” He brought his flat hand up across his Adam’s
apple, “up to here.... Maybe I’ll go home an visit the little girls
of Bordeaux.... At least they are not all made of whalebone.... I’ll
engage myself as a volunteer in the navy and wear a red pompom.... The
girls like that. That’s the only life.... Get drunk and raise cain
payday and see the extreme orient.”

“And die of the syph in a hospital at thirty....”

“What’s it matter?... Your body renews itself every seven years.”

The steps of their rooming house smelled of cabbage and stale beer.
They stumbled up yawning.

“Waiting’s a rotton tiring job.... Makes the soles of your feet
ache.... Look it’s going to be a fine day; I can see the sun on the
watertank opposite.”

Congo pulled off his shoes and socks and trousers and curled up in bed
like a cat.

“Those dirty shades let in all the light,” muttered Emile as he
stretched himself on the outer edge of the bed. He lay tossing uneasily
on the rumpled sheets. Congo’s breathing beside him was low and
regular. If I was only like that, thought Emile, never worrying about a
thing.... But it’s not that way you get along in the world. My God it’s
stupid.... Marco’s gaga the old fool.

And he lay on his back looking up at the rusty stains on the ceiling,
shuddering every time an elevated train shook the room. Sacred name
of God I must save up my money. When he turned over the knob on the
bedstead rattled and he remembered Marco’s hissing husky voice: I never
see the dawn that I dont say to myself perhaps.

       *       *       *       *       *

“If you’ll excuse me just a moment Mr. Olafson,” said the houseagent.
“While you and the madam are deciding about the apartment...” They
stood side by side in the empty room, looking out the window at the
slatecolored Hudson and the warships at anchor and a schooner tacking
upstream.

Suddenly she turned to him with glistening eyes; “O Billy, just think
of it.”

He took hold of her shoulders and drew her to him slowly. “You can
smell the sea, almost.”

“Just think Billy that we are going to live here, on Riverside Drive.
I’ll have to have a day at home ... Mrs. William C. Olafson, 218
Riverside Drive.... I wonder if it is all right to put the address on
our visiting cards.” She took his hand and led him through the empty
cleanswept rooms that no one had ever lived in. He was a big shambling
man with eyes of a washed out blue deepset in a white infantile head.

“It’s a lot of money Bertha.”

“We can afford it now, of course we can. We must live up to our
income.... Your position demands it.... And think how happy we’ll be.”

The house agent came back down the hall rubbing his hands. “Well, well,
well ... Ah I see that we’ve come to a favorable decision.... You are
very wise too, not a finer location in the city of New York and in a
few months you wont be able to get anything out this way for love or
money....”

“Yes we’ll take it from the first of the month.”

“Very good.... You wont regret your decision, Mr. Olafson.”

“I’ll send you a check for the amount in the morning.”

“At your own convenience.... And what is your present address
please....” The houseagent took out a notebook and moistened a stub of
pencil with his tongue.

“You had better put Hotel Astor.” She stepped in front of her husband.

“Our things are stored just at the moment.”

Mr. Olafson turned red.

“And ... er ... we’d like the names of two references please in the
city of New York.”

“I’m with Keating and Bradley, Sanitary Engineers, 43 Park Avenue...”

“He’s just been made assistant general manager,” added Mrs. Olafson.

When they got out on the Drive walking downtown against a tussling wind
she cried out: “Darling I’m so happy.... It’s really going to be worth
living now.”

“But why did you tell him we lived at the Astor?”

“I couldnt tell him we lived in the Bronx could I? He’d have thought we
were Jews and wouldnt have rented us the apartment.”

“But you know I dont like that sort of thing.”

“Well we’ll just move down to the Astor for the rest of the week, if
you’re feeling so truthful.... I’ve never in my life stopped in a big
downtown hotel.”

“Oh Bertha it’s the principle of the thing.... I don’t like you to be
like that.”

She turned and looked at him with twitching nostrils. “You’re so
nambypamby, Billy.... I wish to heavens I’d married a man for a
husband.”

He took her by the arm. “Let’s go up here,” he said gruffly with his
face turned away.

They walked up a cross street between buildinglots. At a corner the
rickety half of a weatherboarded farmhouse was still standing. There
was half a room with blueflowered paper eaten by brown stains on the
walls, a smoked fireplace, a shattered builtin cupboard, and an iron
bedstead bent double.

       *       *       *       *       *

Plates slip endlessly through Bud’s greasy fingers. Smell of swill
and hot soapsuds. Twice round with the little mop, dip, rinse and
pile in the rack for the longnosed Jewish boy to wipe. Knees wet from
spillings, grease creeping up his forearms, elbows cramped.

“Hell this aint no job for a white man.”

“I dont care so long as I eat,” said the Jewish boy above the rattle of
dishes and the clatter and seething of the range where three sweating
cooks fried eggs and ham and hamburger steak and browned potatoes and
cornedbeef hash.

“Sure I et all right,” said Bud and ran his tongue round his teeth
dislodging a sliver of salt meat that he mashed against his palate with
his tongue. Twice round with the little mop, dip, rinse and pile in
the rack for the longnosed Jewish boy to wipe. There was a lull. The
Jewish boy handed Bud a cigarette. They stood leaning against the sink.

“Aint no way to make money dishwashing.” The cigarette wabbled on the
Jewish boy’s heavy lip as he spoke.

“Aint no job for a white man nohow,” said Bud. “Waitin’s better, they’s
the tips.”

A man in a brown derby came in through the swinging door from the
lunchroom. He was a bigjawed man with pigeyes and a long cigar sticking
straight out of the middle of his mouth. Bud caught his eye and felt
the cold glint twisting his bowels.

“Whosat?” he whispered.

“Dunno.... Customer I guess.”

“Dont he look to you like one o them detectives?”

“How de hell should I know? I aint never been in jail.” The Jewish boy
turned red and stuck out his jaw.

The busboy set down a new pile of dirty dishes. Twice round with the
little mop, dip, rinse and pile in the rack. When the man in the brown
derby passed back through the kitchen, Bud kept his eyes on his red
greasy hands. What the hell even if he is a detective.... When Bud had
finished the batch, he strolled to the door wiping his hands, took
his coat and hat from the hook and slipped out the side door past the
garbage cans out into the street. Fool to jump two hours pay. In an
optician’s window the clock was at twentyfive past two. He walked down
Broadway, past Lincoln Square, across Columbus Circle, further downtown
towards the center of things where it’d be more crowded.

       *       *       *       *       *

She lay with her knees doubled up to her chin, the nightgown pulled
tight under her toes.

“Now straighten out and go to sleep dear.... Promise mother you’ll go
to sleep.”

“Wont daddy come and kiss me good night?”

“He will when he comes in; he’s gone back down to the office and
mother’s going to Mrs. Spingarn’s to play euchre.”

“When’ll daddy be home?”

“Ellie I said go to sleep.... I’ll leave the light.”

“Dont mummy, it makes shadows.... When’ll daddy be home?”

“When he gets good and ready.” She was turning down the gaslight.
Shadows out of the corners joined wings and rushed together. “Good
night Ellen.” The streak of light of the door narrowed behind mummy,
slowly narrowed to a thread up and along the top. The knob clicked; the
steps went away down the hall; the front door slammed. A clock ticked
somewhere in the silent room; outside the apartment, outside the house,
wheels and gallumping of hoofs, trailing voices; the roar grew. It was
black except for the two strings of light that made an upside down L in
the corner of the door.

Ellie wanted to stretch out her feet but she was afraid to. She didnt
dare take her eyes from the upside down L in the corner of the door. If
she closed her eyes the light would go out. Behind the bed, out of the
windowcurtains, out of the closet, from under the table shadows nudged
creakily towards her. She held on tight to her ankles, pressed her chin
in between her knees. The pillow bulged with shadow, rummaging shadows
were slipping into the bed. If she closed her eyes the light would go
out.

Black spiraling roar outside was melting through the walls making the
cuddled shadows throb. Her tongue clicked against her teeth like the
ticking of the clock. Her arms and legs were stiff; her neck was stiff;
she was going to yell. Yell above the roaring and the rattat outside,
yell to make daddy hear, daddy come home. She drew in her breath and
shrieked again. Make daddy come home. The roaring shadows staggered and
danced, the shadows lurched round and round. Then she was crying, her
eyes were full of safe warm tears, they were running over her cheeks
and into her ears. She turned over and lay crying with her face in the
pillow.

       *       *       *       *       *

The gaslamps tremble a while down the purplecold streets and then go
out under the lurid dawn. Gus McNiel, the sleep still gumming his eyes,
walks beside his wagon swinging a wire basket of milkbottles, stopping
at doors, collecting the empties, climbing chilly stairs, remembering
grades A and B and pints of cream and buttermilk, while the sky behind
cornices, tanks, roofpeaks, chimneys becomes rosy and yellow. Hoarfrost
glistens on doorsteps and curbs. The horse with dangling head lurches
jerkily from door to door. There begin to be dark footprints on the
frosty pavement. A heavy brewers’ dray rumbles down the street.

“Howdy Moike, a little chilled are ye?” shouts Gus McNiel at a cop
threshing his arms on the corner of Eighth Avenue.

“Howdy Gus. Cows still milkin’?”

It’s broad daylight when he finally slaps the reins down on the
gelding’s threadbare rump and starts back to the dairy, empties
bouncing and jiggling in the cart behind him. At Ninth Avenue a train
shoots overhead clattering downtown behind a little green engine that
emits blobs of smoke white and dense as cottonwool to melt in the raw
air between the stiff blackwindowed houses. The first rays of the sun
pick out the gilt lettering of DANIEL McGILLYCUDDY’S WINES AND LIQUORS
at the corner of Tenth Avenue. Gus McNiel’s tongue is dry and the
dawn has a salty taste in his mouth. A can o beer’d be the makin of
a guy a cold mornin like this. He takes a turn with the reins round
the whip and jumps over the wheel. His numb feet sting when they hit
the pavement. Stamping to get the blood back into his toes he shoves
through the swinging doors.

“Well I’ll be damned if it aint the milkman bringin us a pint o cream
for our coffee.” Gus spits into the newly polished cuspidor beside the
bar.

“Boy, I got a thoist on me....”

“Been drinkin too much milk again, Gus, I’ll warrant,” roars the
barkeep out of a square steak face.

The saloon smells of brasspolish and fresh sawdust. Through an open
window a streak of ruddy sunlight caresses the rump of a naked lady who
reclines calm as a hardboiled egg on a bed of spinach in a giltframed
picture behind the bar.

“Well Gus what’s yer pleasure a foine cold mornin loike this?”

“I guess beer’ll do, Mac.”

The foam rises in the glass, trembles up, slops over. The barkeep cuts
across the top with a wooden scoop, lets the foam settle a second, then
puts the glass under the faintly wheezing spigot again. Gus is settling
his heel comfortably against the brass rail.

“Well how’s the job?”

Gus gulps the glass of beer and makes a mark on his neck with his flat
hand before wiping his mouth with it. “Full up to the neck wid it....
I tell yer what I’m goin to do, I’m goin to go out West, take up free
land in North Dakota or somewhere an raise wheat.... I’m pretty handy
round a farm.... This here livin in the city’s no good.”

“How’ll Nellie take that?”

“She wont cotton to it much at foist, loikes her comforts of home an
all that she’s been used to, but I think she’ll loike it foine onct
she’s out there an all. This aint no loife for her nor me neyther.”

“You’re right there. This town’s goin to hell.... Me and the misses’ll
sell out here some day soon I guess. If we could buy a noice genteel
restaurant uptown or a roadhouse, that’s what’d suit us. Got me eye on
a little property out Bronxville way, within easy drivin distance.” He
lifts a malletshaped fist meditatively to his chin. “I’m sick o bouncin
these goddam drunks every night. Whade hell did I get outen the ring
for xep to stop fightin? Jus last night two guys starts asluggin an I
has to mix it up with both of em to clear the place out.... I’m sick o
fighten every drunk on Tenth Avenoo.... Have somethin on the house?”

“Jez I’m afraid Nellie’ll smell it on me.”

“Oh, niver moind that. Nellie ought to be used to a bit o drinkin. Her
ole man loikes it well enough.”

“But honest Mac I aint been slopped once since me weddinday.”

“I dont blame ye. She’s a real sweet girl Nellie is. Those little
spitcurls o hers’d near drive a feller crazy.”

The second beer sends a foamy acrid flush to Gus’s fingertips. Laughing
he slaps his thigh.

“She’s a pippin, that’s what she is Gus, so ladylike an all.”

“Well I reckon I’ll be gettin back to her.”

“You lucky young divil to be goin home to bed wid your wife when we’re
all startin to go to work.”

Gus’s red face gets redder. His ears tingle. “Sometimes she’s abed
yet.... So long Mac.” He stamps out into the street again.

The morning has grown bleak. Leaden clouds have settled down over the
city. “Git up old skin an bones,” shouts Gus jerking at the gelding’s
head. Eleventh Avenue is full of icy dust, of grinding rattle of wheels
and scrape of hoofs on the cobblestones. Down the railroad tracks comes
the clang of a locomotive bell and the clatter of shunting freightcars.
Gus is in bed with his wife talking gently to her: Look here Nellie,
you wouldn’t moind movin West would yez? I’ve filed application for
free farmin land in the state o North Dakota, black soil land where we
can make a pile o money in wheat; some fellers git rich in foive good
crops.... Healthier for the kids anyway.... “Hello Moike!” There’s
poor old Moike still on his beat. Cold work bein a cop. Better be a
wheatfarmer an have a big farmhouse an barns an pigs an horses an cows
an chickens.... Pretty curlyheaded Nellie feedin the chickens at the
kitchen door....

“Hay dere for crissake....” a man is yelling at Gus from the curb.
“Look out for de cars!”

A yelling mouth gaping under a visored cap, a green flag waving.
“Godamighty I’m on the tracks.” He yanks the horse’s head round. A
crash rips the wagon behind him. Cars, the gelding, a green flag, red
houses whirl and crumble into blackness.




III. Dollars

          _All along the rails there were faces; in the portholes
          there were faces. Leeward a stale smell came from the tubby
          steamer that rode at anchor listed a little to one side
          with the yellow quarantine flag drooping at the foremast._

          _“I’d give a million dollars,” said the old man resting on
          his oars, “to know what they come for.”_

          _“Just for that pop,” said the young man who sat in the
          stern. “Aint it the land of opportoonity?”_

          _“One thing I do know,” said the old man. “When I was a boy
          it was wild Irish came in the spring with the first run of
          shad.... Now there aint no more shad, an them folks, Lord
          knows where they come from.”_

          _“It’s the land of opportoonity.”_


A leanfaced young man with steel eyes and a thin highbridged nose
sat back in a swivel chair with his feet on his new mahogany-finish
desk. His skin was sallow, his lips gently pouting. He wriggled in the
swivel chair watching the little scratches his shoes were making on the
veneer. Damn it I dont care. Then he sat up suddenly making the swivel
shriek and banged on his knee with his clenched fist. “Results,” he
shouted. Three months I’ve sat rubbing my tail on this swivel chair....
What’s the use of going through lawschool and being admitted to the
bar if you cant find anybody to practice on? He frowned at the gold
lettering through the groundglass door.

                             NIWDLAB EGROEG
                            WAL-TA-YENROTTA

Niwdlab, Welsh. He jumped to his feet. I’ve read that damn sign
backwards every day for three months. I’m going crazy. I’ll go out and
eat lunch.

He straightened his vest and brushed some flecks of dust off his shoes
with a handkerchief, then, contracting his face into an expression of
intense preoccupation, he hurried out of his office, trotted down the
stairs and out onto Maiden Lane. In front of the chophouse he saw the
headline on a pink extra; JAPS THROWN BACK FROM MUKDEN. He bought the
paper and folded it under his arm as he went in through the swinging
door. He took a table and pored over the bill of fare. Mustn’t be
extravagant now. “Waiter you can bring me a New England boiled dinner,
a slice of applepie and coffee.” The longnosed waiter wrote the order
on his slip looking at it sideways with a careful frown.... That’s the
lunch for a lawyer without any practice. Baldwin cleared his throat
and unfolded the paper.... Ought to liven up the Russian bonds a bit.
Veterans Visit President.... ANOTHER ACCIDENT ON ELEVENTH AVENUE
TRACKS. Milkman seriously injured. Hello, that’d make a neat little
damage suit.

     Augustus McNiel, 253 W. 4th Street, who drives a milkwagon
     for the Excelsior Dairy Co. was severely injured early this
     morning when a freight train backing down the New York
     Central tracks ...

He ought to sue the railroad. By gum I ought to get hold of that man
and make him sue the railroad.... Not yet recovered consciousness....
Maybe he’s dead. Then his wife can sue them all the more.... I’ll go
to the hospital this very afternoon.... Get in ahead of any of these
shysters. He took a determined bite of bread and chewed it vigorously.
Of course not; I’ll go to the house and see if there isn’t a wife or
mother or something: Forgive me Mrs. McNiel if I intrude upon your deep
affliction, but I am engaged in an investigation at this moment....
Yes, retained by prominent interests.... He drank up the last of the
coffee and paid the bill.

Repeating 253 W. 4th Street over and over he boarded an uptown car on
Broadway. Walking west along 4th he skirted Washington Square. The
trees spread branches of brittle purple into a dovecolored sky; the
largewindowed houses opposite glowed very pink, nonchalant, prosperous.
The very place for a lawyer with a large conservative practice to make
his residence. We’ll just see about that. He crossed Sixth Avenue and
followed the street into the dingy West Side, where there was a smell
of stables and the sidewalks were littered with scraps of garbage
and crawling children. Imagine living down here among low Irish and
foreigners, the scum of the universe. At 253 there were several
unmarked bells. A woman with gingham sleeves rolled up on sausageshaped
arms stuck a gray mophead out the window.

“Can you tell me if Augustus McNiel lives here?”

“Him that’s up there alayin in horspital. Sure he does.”

“That’s it. And has he any relatives living here?”

“An what would you be wantin wid ’em?”

“It’s a little matter of business.”

“Go up to the top floor an you’ll foind his wife there but most likely
she cant see yez.... The poor thing’s powerful wrought up about her
husband, an them only eighteen months married.”

The stairs were tracked with muddy footprints and sprinkled here and
there with the spilling of ashcans. At the top he found a freshpainted
darkgreen door and knocked.

“Who’s there?” came a girl’s voice that sent a little shiver through
him. Must be young.

“Is Mrs. McNiel in?”

“Yes,” came the lilting girl’s voice again. “What is it?”

“It’s a matter of business about Mr. McNiel’s accident.”

“About the accident is it?” The door opened in little cautious jerks.
She had a sharpcut pearlywhite nose and chin and a pile of wavy
redbrown hair that lay in little flat curls round her high narrow
forehead. Gray eyes sharp and suspicious looked him hard in the face.

“May I speak to you a minute about Mr. McNiel’s accident? There are
certain legal points involved that I feel it my duty to make known to
you.... By the way I hope he’s better.”

“Oh yes he’s come to.”

“May I come in? It’s a little long to explain.”

“I guess you can.” Her pouting lips flattened into a wry smile. “I
guess you wont eat me.”

“No honestly I wont.” He laughed nervously in his throat.

She led the way into the darkened sitting room. “I’m not pulling up the
shades so’s you wont see the pickle everythin’s in.”

“Allow me to introduce myself, Mrs. McNiel.... George Baldwin, 88
Maiden Lane.... You see I make a specialty of cases like this.... To
put the whole matter in a nutshell.... Your husband was run down and
nearly killed through the culpable or possibly criminal negligence
of the employees of the New York Central Railroad. There is full and
ample cause for a suit against the railroad. Now I have reason to
believe that the Excelsior Dairy Company will bring suit for the losses
incurred, horse and wagon etcetera....”

“You mean you think Gus is more likely to get damages himself?”

“Exactly.”

“How much do you think he could get?”

“Why that depends on how badly hurt he is, on the attitude of the
court, and perhaps on the skill of the lawyer.... I think ten thousand
dollars is a conservative figure.”

“And you dont ask no money down?”

“The lawyer’s fee is rarely paid until the case is brought to a
successful termination.”

“An you’re a lawyer, honest? You look kinder young to be a lawyer.”

The gray eyes flashed in his. They both laughed. He felt a warm
inexplicable flush go through him.

“I’m a lawyer all the same. I make a specialty of cases like these.
Why only last Tuesday I got six thousand dollars for a client who was
kicked by a relay horse riding on the loop.... Just at this moment as
you may know there is considerable agitation for revoking altogether
the franchise of the Eleventh Avenue tracks.... I think this is a most
favorable moment.”

“Say do you always talk like that, or is it just business?”

He threw back his head and laughed.

“Poor old Gus, I always said he had a streak of luck in him.”

The wail of a child crept thinly through the partition into the room.

“What’s that?”

“It’s only the baby.... The little wretch dont do nothin but squall.”

“So you’ve got children Mrs. McNiel?” The thought chilled him somehow.

“Juss one ... what kin ye expect?”

“Is it the Emergency Hospital?”

“Yes I reckon they’ll let you see him as it’s a matter of business.
He’s groanin somethin dreadful.”

“Now if I could get a few good witnesses.”

“Mike Doheny seen it all.... He’s on the force. He’s a good frien of
Gus’s.”

“By gad we’ve got a case and a half.... Why they’ll settle out of
court.... I’ll go right up to the hospital.”

A fresh volley of wails came from the other room.

“Oh, that brat,” she whispered, screwing up her face. “We could use the
money all right Mr. Baldwin....”

“Well I must go.” He picked up his hat. “And I certainly will do my
best in this case. May I come by and report progress to you from time
to time?”

“I hope you will.”

When they shook hands at the door he couldn’t seem to let go her hand.
She blushed.

“Well goodby and thank you very much for callin,” she said stiffly.

Baldwin staggered dizzily down the stairs. His head was full of blood.
The most beautiful girl I’ve ever seen in my life. Outside it had begun
to snow. The snowflakes were cold furtive caresses to his hot cheeks.

The sky over the Park was mottled with little tiptailed clouds like a
field of white chickens.

“Look Alice, lets us go down this little path.”

“But Ellen, my dad told me to come straight home from school.”

“Scarecat!”

“But Ellen those dreadful kidnappers....”

“I told you not to call me Ellen any more.”

“Well Elaine then, Elaine the lily maid of Astalot.”

Ellen had on her new Black Watch plaid dress. Alice wore glasses and
had legs thin as hairpins.

“Scarecat!”

“They’re dreadful men sitting on that bench. Come along Elaine the
fair, let’s go home.”

“I’m not scared of them. I could fly like Peter Pan if I wanted to.”

“Why dont you do it?”

“I dont want to just now.”

Alice began to whimper. “Oh Ellen I think you’re mean.... Come along
home Elaine.”

“No I’m going for a walk in the Park.”

Ellen started down the steps. Alice stood a minute on the top step
balancing first on one foot then on the other.

“Scaredy scaredy scarecat!” yelled Ellen.

Alice ran off blubbering. “I’m goin to tell your mommer.”

Ellen walked down the asphalt path among the shrubbery kicking her toes
in the air.

Ellen in her new dress of Black Watch plaid mummy’d bought at Hearn’s
walked down the asphalt path kicking her toes in the air. There was
a silver thistle brooch on the shoulder of the new dress of Black
Watch plaid mummy’d bought at Hearn’s. Elaine of Lammermoor was going
to be married. The Betrothed. Wangnaan nainainai, went the bagpipes
going through the rye. The man on the bench has a patch over his eye.
A watching black patch. A black watching patch. The kidnapper of the
Black Watch, among the rustling shrubs kidnappers keep their Black
Watch. Ellen’s toes dont kick in the air. Ellen is terribly scared of
the kidnapper of the Black Watch, big smelly man of the Black Watch
with a patch over his eye. She’s scared to run. Her heavy feet scrape
on the asphalt as she tries to run fast down the path. She’s scared to
turn her head. The kidnapper of the Black Watch is right behind. When I
get to the lamppost I’ll run as far as the nurse and the baby, when I
get to the nurse and the baby I’ll run as far as the big tree, when I
get to the big tree.... Oh I’m so tired.... I’ll run out onto Central
Park West and down the street home. She was scared to turn round. She
ran with a stitch in her side. She ran till her mouth tasted like
pennies.

“What are you running for Ellie?” asked Gloria Drayton who was skipping
rope outside the Norelands.

“Because I wanted to,” panted Ellen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Winey afterglow stained the muslin curtains and filtered into the blue
gloom of the room. They stood on either side of the table. Out of a pot
of narcissus still wrapped in tissue paper starshaped flowers gleamed
with dim phosphorescence, giving off a damp earthsmell enmeshed in
indolent prickly perfume.

“It was nice of you to bring me these Mr. Baldwin. I’ll take them up to
Gus at the hospital tomorrow.”

“For God’s sake dont call me that.”

“But I dont like the name of George.”

“I dont care, I like your name, Nellie.”

He stood looking at her; perfumed weights coiled about his arms. His
hands dangled like empty gloves. Her eyes were black, dilating, her
lips pouting towards him across the flowers. She jerked her hands up to
cover her face. His arm was round her little thin shoulders.

“But honest Georgy, we’ve got to be careful. You mustn’t come here so
often. I dont want all the old hens in the house to start talkin.”

“Dont worry about that.... We mustn’t worry about anything.”
“I’ve been actin’ like I was crazy this last week.... I’ve got to quit.”

“You dont think I’ve been acting naturally, do you? I swear to God
Nellie I’ve never done anything like this before. I’m not that kind of
a person.”

She showed her even teeth in a laugh. “Oh you kin never tell about men.”

“But if it weren’t something extraordinary and exceptional you dont
think I’d be running after you this way do you? I’ve never been in love
with anybody but you Nellie.”

“That’s a good one.”

“But it’s true.... I’ve never gone in for that sort of thing. I’ve
worked too hard getting through lawschool and all that to have time for
girls.”

“Makin up for lost time I should say.”

“Oh Nellie dont talk like that.”

“But honestly Georgy I’ve got to cut this stuff out. What’ll we do when
Gus comes out of the hospital? An I’m neglectin the kid an everythin.”

“Christ I dont care what happens.... Oh Nellie.” He pulled her face
round. They clung to each other swaying, mouths furiously mingling.

“Look out we almost had the lamp over.”

“God you’re wonderful, Nellie.” Her head had dropped on his chest, he
could feel the pungence of her tumbled hair all through him. It was
dark. Snakes of light from the streetlamp wound greenly about them. Her
eyes looked up into his frighteningly solemnly black.

“Look Nellie lets go in the other room,” he whispered in a tiny
trembling voice.

“Baby’s in there.”

They stood apart with cold hands looking at each other. “Come here an
help me. I’ll move the cradle in here.... Careful not to wake her or
she’ll bawl her head off.” Her voice crackled huskily.

The baby was asleep, her little rubbery face tight closed, minute pink
fists clenched on the coverlet.

“She looks happy,” he said with a forced titter.

“Keep quiet cant you.... Here take yer shoes off.... There’s been
enough trampin o men’s shoes up here.... Georgy I wouldn’t do this, but
I juss cant help....”

He fumbled for her in the dark. “You darling....” Clumsy he brooded
over her, breathing crazily deep.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Flatfoot you’re stringin us....”

“I aint, honest I’d swear by me muder’s grave it’s de trutt....
Latitude toityseven soutt by twelve west.... You go dere an see....
On dat island we made in de second officer’s boat when de _Elliot P.
Simkins_ foundered der was four males and fortyseven females includin
women an children. Waren’t it me dat tole de reporter guy all about it
an it came out in all de Sunday papers?”

“But Flatfoot how the hell did they ever get you away from there?”

“Dey carried me off on a stretcher or I’m a cockeyed lyer. I’ll be a
sonofabitch if I warnt founderin, goin down by de bows like de ole
_Elliot P_.”

Heads tossed back on thick necks let out volleys of laughter, glasses
were banged on the round ringmarked table, thighs resounded with slaps,
elbows were poked into ribs.

“An how many guys was in de boat?”

“Six includin Mr. Dorkins de second officer.”

“Seven and four makes eleven.... Jez.... Four an three-elevenths broads
per capita.... Some island.”

“When does the next ferry leave?”

“Better have another drink on that.... Hay Charlie fill ’em up.”

Emile pulled at Congo’s elbow. “Come outside a sec. J’ai que’quechose a
te dire.” Congo’s eyes were wet, he staggered a little as he followed
Emile into the outer bar. “O le p’tit mysterieux.”

“Look here, I’ve got to go call on a lady friend.”

“Oh that’s what’s eating you is it? I always said you was a wise guy
Emile.”

“Look, here’s my address on a piece of paper in case you forget it: 945
West 22nd. You can come and sleep there if you’re not too pickled, and
dont you bring any friends or women or anything. I’m in right with the
landlady and I dont want to spoil it.... Tu comprends.”

“But I wanted you to come on a swell party.... Faut faire un peu la
noce, nom de dieu!...”

“I got to work in the morning.”

“But I got eight months’ pay in my pocket....

“Anyway come round tomorrow at about six. I’ll wait for you.”

“Tu m’emmerdes tu sais avec tes manières;” Congo aimed a jet of saliva
at the spittoon in the corner of the bar and turned back frowning into
the inside room.

“Hay dere sit down Congo; Barney’s goin to sing de Bastard King of
England.”

Emile jumped on a streetcar and rode uptown. At Eighteenth Street he
got off and walked west to Eighth Avenue. Two doors from the corner
was a small store. Over one window was CONFISERIE, over the other
DELICATESSEN. In the middle of the glass door white enamel letters
read Emile Rigaud, High Class Table Dainties. Emile went in. The bell
jangled on the door. A dark stout woman with black hairs over the
corners of her mouth was drowsing behind the counter. Emile took off
his hat. “Bonsoir Madame Rigaud.” She looked up with a start, then
showed two dimples in a profound smile.

“Tieng c’est comma ça qu’ong oublie ses ami-es,” she said in a booming
Bordelais voice. “Here’s a week that I say to myself, Monsieur Loustec
is forgetting his friends.”

“I never have any time any more.”

“Lots of work, lots of money, heing?” When she laughed her shoulders
shook and the big breasts under the tight blue bodice.

Emile screwed up one eye. “Might be worse.... But I’m sick of
waiting.... It’s so tiring; nobody regards a waiter.”

“You are a man of ambition, Monsieur Loustec.”

“Que voulez vous?” He blushed, and said timidly “My name’s Emile.”

Mme. Rigaud rolled her eyes towards the ceiling. “That was my dead
husband’s name. I’m used to that name.” She sighed heavily.

“And how’s business?”

“Comma ci comma ça.... Ham’s gone up again.”

“It’s the Chicago ring’s doing that.... A corner in pork, that’s the
way to make money.”

Emile found Mme. Rigaud’s bulgy black eyes probing his. “I enjoyed your
singing so last time.... I’ve thought of it often.... Music does one
good dont it?” Mme. Rigaud’s dimples stretched and stretched as she
smiled. “My poor husband had no ear.... That gave me a great deal of
pain.”

“Couldn’t you sing me something this evening?”

“If you want me to, Emile?... But there is nobody to wait on customers.”

“I’ll run in when we hear the bell, if you will permit me.”

“Very well.... I’ve learned a new American song ... C’est chic vous
savez.”

Mme. Rigaud locked the till with a key from the bunch that hung at her
belt and went through the glass door in the back of the shop. Emile
followed with his hat in his hand.

“Give me your hat Emile.”

“Oh dont trouble yourself.”

The room beyond was a little parlor with yellow flowered wallpaper,
old salmon pink portières and, under the gas-bracket from which hung
a bunch of crystals, a piano with photographs on it. The pianostool
creaked when Mme. Rigaud sat down. She ran her fingers over the keys.
Emile sat carefully on the very edge of the chair beside the piano
with his hat on his knees and pushed his face forward so that as she
played she could see it out of the corner of her eye tilted up towards
hers. Madame Rigaud began to sing:

    Just a birrd in a geelded cage
    A beauteeful sight to see
    You’d tink se vas ’appee
    And free from all care
    Se’s not zo se seems to be....

The bell on the door of the shop jangled loud.

“Permettez,” cried Emile running out.

“Half a pound o bolony sausage sliced,” said a little girl with
pigtails. Emile passed the knife across the palm of his hand and sliced
the sausage carefully. He tiptoed back into the parlor and put the
money on the edge of the piano. Madame Rigaud was still singing:

    Tis sad ven you tink of a vasted life
    For yout cannot mate vit age
    Beautee vas soooold
    For an old man’s gooold
    Se’s a birrd in a geelded cage.

Bud stood on the corner of West Broadway and Franklin Street eating
peanuts out of a bag. It was noon and his money was all gone. The
Elevated thundered overhead. Dustmotes danced before his eyes in the
girderstriped sunlight. Wondering which way to go he spelled out the
names of the streets for the third time. A black shiny cab drawn by two
black shinyrumped horses turned the corner sharp in front of him with a
rasp on the cobblestones of red shiny wheels suddenly braked. There was
a yellow leather trunk on the seat beside the driver. In the cab a man
in a brown derby talked loud to a woman with a gray feather boa round
her neck and gray ostrich plumes in her hat. The man jerked a revolver
up to his mouth. The horses reared and plunged in the middle of a
shoving crowd. Policemen elbowing through. They had the man out on the
curbstone vomiting blood, head hanging limp over his checked vest. The
woman stood tall and white beside him twisting her feather boa in her
hands, the gray plumes in her hat nodding in the striped sunlight under
the elevated.

“His wife was taking him to Europe.... The _Deutschland_ sailing
at twelve. I’d said goodby to him forever. He was sailing on the
_Deutschland_ at twelve. He’d said goodby to me forever.”

“Git oute de way dere;” a cop jabbed Bud in the stomach with his elbow.
His knees trembled. He got to the edge of the crowd and walked away
trembling. Mechanically he shelled a peanut and put it in his mouth.
Better save the rest till evenin. He twisted the mouth of the bag and
dropped it into his pocket.

       *       *       *       *       *

Under the arclight that spluttered pink and green-edged violet the man
in the checked suit passed two girls. The full-lipped oval face of the
girl nearest to him; her eyes were like a knifethrust. He walked a few
paces then turned and followed them fingering his new satin necktie. He
made sure the horseshoe diamond pin was firm in its place. He passed
them again. Her face was turned away. Maybe she was.... No he couldn’t
tell. Good luck he had fifty dollars on him. He sat on a bench and
let them pass him. Wouldnt do to make a mistake and get arrested.
They didnt notice him. He followed them down the path and out of the
Park. His heart was pounding. I’d give a million dollars for ... Pray
pardon me, isn’t this Miss Anderson? The girls walked fast. In the
crowd crossing Columbus Circle he lost sight of them. He hurried down
Broadway block after block. The full lips, the eyes like the thrust of
a knife. He stared in girls’ faces right and left. Where could she have
gone? He hurried on down Broadway.

Ellen was sitting beside her father on a bench at the Battery. She was
looking at her new brown button shoes. A glint of sunlight caught on
the toes and on each of the little round buttons when she swung her
feet out from under the shadow of her dress.

“Think how it’d be,” Ed Thatcher was saying, “to go abroad on one of
those liners. Imagine crossing the great Atlantic in seven days.”

“But daddy what do people do all that time on a boat?”

“I dunno ... I suppose they walk round the deck and play cards and read
and all that sort of thing. Then they have dances.”

“Dances on a boat! I should think it’d be awful tippy.” Ellen giggled.

“On the big modern liners they do.”

“Daddy why dont we go?”

“Maybe we will some day if I can save up the money.”

“Oh daddy do hurry up an save a lot of money. Alice Vaughan’s mother an
father go to the White Mountains every summer, but next summer they’re
going abroad.”

Ed Thatcher looked out across the bay that stretched in blue sparkling
reaches into the brown haze towards the Narrows. The statue of Liberty
stood up vague as a sleepwalker among the curling smoke of tugboats and
the masts of schooners and the blunt lumbering masses of brickbarges
and sandscows. Here and there the glary sun shone out white on a sail
or on the superstructure of a steamer. Red ferryboats shuttled back and
forth.

“Daddy why arent we rich?”

“There are lots of people poorer than us Ellie.... You wouldn’t like
your daddy any better if he were rich would you?”

“Oh yes I would daddy.”

Thatcher laughed. “Well it might happen someday.... How would you like
the firm of Edward C. Thatcher and Co., Certified Accountants?”

Ellen jumped to her feet: “Oh look at that big boat.... That’s the boat
I want to go on.”

“That there’s the _Harabic_,” croaked a cockney voice beside them.

“Oh is it really?” said Thatcher.

“Indeed it is, sir; as fahne a ship as syles the sea sir,” explained
eagerly a frayed creakyvoiced man who sat on the bench beside them. A
cap with a broken patentleather visor was pulled down over a little
peaked face that exuded a faded smell of whiskey. “Yes sir, the
_Harabic_ sir.”

“Looks like a good big boat that does.”

“One of the biggest afloat sir. I syled on er many’s the tahme and on
the _Majestic_ and the _Teutonic_ too sir, fahne ships both, though a
bit light’eaded in a sea as you might say. I’ve signed as steward on
the Hinman and White Star lahnes these thirty years and now in me old
age they’ve lyed me hoff.”

“Oh well, we all have hard luck sometimes.”

“And some of us as it hall the tahme sir.... I’d be a appy man sir, if
I could get back to the old country. This arent any plyce for an old
man, it’s for the young and strong, this is.” He drew a gout-twisted
hand across the bay and pointed to the statue. “Look at er, she’s
alookin towards Hengland she is.”

“Daddy let’s go away. I dont like this man,” whispered Ellen
tremulously in her father’s ear.

“All right we’ll go and take a look at the sealions.... Good day.”

“You couldn’t fahnd me the price of a cup o coffee, could you now sir?
I’m fair foundered.” Thatcher put a dime in the grimy knobbed hand.

“But daddy, mummy said never to let people speak to you in the street
an to call a policeman if they did an to run away as fast as you could
on account of those horrible kidnappers.”

“No danger of their kidnapping me Ellie. That’s just for little girls.”

“When I grow up will I be able to talk to people on the street like
that?”

“No deary you certainly will not.”

“If I’d been a boy could I?”

“I guess you could.”

In front of the Aquarium they stopped a minute to look down the bay.
The liner with a tug puffing white smoke against either bow was abreast
of them towering above the ferryboats and harborcraft. Gulls wheeled
and screamed. The sun shone creamily on the upper decks and on the big
yellow blackcapped funnel. From the foremast a string of little flags
fluttered jauntily against the slate sky.

“And there are lots of people coming over from abroad on that boat
arent there daddy?”

“Look you can see ... the decks are black with people.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Walking across Fiftythird Street from the East River Bud Korpenning
found himself standing beside a pile of coal on the sidewalk. On the
other side of the pile of coal a grayhaired woman in a flounced lace
shirtwaist with a big pink cameo poised on the curve of her high bosom
was looking at his stubbly chin and at the wrists that hung raw below
the frayed sleeves of his coat. Then he heard himself speak:

“Dont spose I could take that load of coal in back for you ma’am?” Bud
shifted his weight from one foot to the other.

“That’s just what you could do,” the woman said in a cracked voice.
“That wretched coal man left it this morning and said he’d be back to
bring it in. I suppose he’s drunk like the rest of them. I wonder if I
can trust you in the house.”

“I’m from upstate ma’am,” stammered Bud.

“From where?”

“From Cooperstown.”

“Hum.... I’m from Buffalo. This is certainly the city for everyone
being from somewhere else.... Well you’re probably a burglar’s
accomplice, but I cant help it I’ve got to have that coal in.... Come
in my man, I’ll give you a shovel and a basket and if you dont drop any
in the passage or on the kitchen floor, because the scrubwoman’s just
left ... naturally the coal had to come when the floor was clean....
I’ll give you a dollar.”

When he carried in the first load she was hovering in the kitchen.
His caving hungersniff stomach made him totter lightheadedly, but he
was happy to be working instead of dragging his feet endlessly along
pavements, across streets, dodging drays and carts and streetcars.

“How is it you haven’t got a regular job my man,” she asked as he came
back breathless with the empty basket.

“I reckon it’s as I aint caught on to city ways yet. I was born an
raised on a farm.”

“And what did you want to come to this horrible city for?”

“Couldn’t stay on the farm no more.”

“It’s terrible what’s going to become of this country if all the fine
strong young men leave the farms and come into the cities.”

“Thought I could git a work as a longshoreman, ma’am, but they’re
layin’ men off down on the wharves. Mebbe I kin go to sea as a sailor
but nobody wants a green hand.... I aint et for two days now.”

“How terrible.... Why you poor man couldn’t you have gone to some
mission or something?”

When Bud had brought the last load in he found a plate of cold stew on
the corner of the kitchen table, half a loaf of stale bread and a glass
of milk that was a little sour. He ate quickly barely chewing and put
the last of the stale bread in his pocket.

“Well did you enjoy your little lunch?”

“Thankye ma’am.” He nodded with his mouth full.

“Well you can go now and thank you very much.” She put a quarter into
his hand. Bud blinked at the quarter in the palm of his hand.

“But ma’am you said you’d give me a dollar.”

“I never said any such thing. The idea.... I’ll call my husband if you
dont get out of here immediately. In fact I’ve a great mind to notify
the police as it is....”

Without a word Bud pocketed the quarter and shuffled out.

“Such ingratitude,” he heard the woman snort as he closed the door
behind him.

A cramp was tying knots in his stomach. He turned east again and walked
the long blocks to the river with his fists pressed tight in under his
ribs. At any moment he expected to throw up. If I lose it it wont do
me no good. When he got to the end of the street he lay down on the
gray rubbish slide beside the wharf. A smell of hops seeped gruelly and
sweet out of the humming brewery behind him. The light of the sunset
flamed in the windows of factories on the Long Island side, flashed in
the portholes of tugs, lay in swaths of curling yellow and orange over
the swift browngreen water, glowed on the curved sails of a schooner
that was slowly bucking the tide up into Hell Gate. Inside him the pain
was less. Something flamed and glowed like the sunset seeping through
his body. He sat up. Thank Gawd I aint agoin to lose it.

       *       *       *       *       *

On deck it’s damp and shivery in the dawn. The ship’s rail is wet when
you put your hand on it. The brown harborwater smells of washbasins,
rustles gently against the steamer’s sides. Sailors are taking the
hatches off the hold. There’s a rattle of chains and a clatter from the
donkeyengine where a tall man in blue overalls stands at a lever in the
middle of a cloud of steam that wraps round your face like a wet towel.

“Muddy is it really the Fourth of July?”

Mother’s hand has grasped his firmly trailing him down the companionway
into the dining saloon. Stewards are piling up baggage at the foot of
the stairs.

“Muddy is it really the Fourth of July?”

“Yes deary I’m afraid it is.... A holiday is a dreadful time to arrive.
Still I guess they’ll all be down to meet us.”

She has her blue serge on and a long trailing brown veil and the
little brown animal with red eyes and teeth that are real teeth round
her neck. A smell of mothballs comes from it, of unpacking trunks, of
wardrobes littered with tissuepaper. It’s hot in the dining saloon,
the engines sob soothingly behind the bulkhead. His head nods over
his cup of hot milk just colored with coffee. Three bells. His head
snaps up with a start. The dishes tinkle and the coffee spills with
the trembling of the ship. Then a thud and rattle of anchorchains and
gradually quiet. Muddy gets up to look through the porthole.

“Why it’s going to be a fine day after all. I think the sun will burn
through the mist.... Think of it dear; home at last. This is where you
were born deary.”

“And it’s the Fourth of July.”

“Worst luck.... Now Jimmy you must promise me to stay on the promenade
deck and be very careful. Mother has to finish packing. Promise me you
wont get into any mischief.”

“I promise.”

He catches his toe on the brass threshold of the smokingroom door and
sprawls on deck, gets up rubbing his bare knee just in time to see the
sun break through chocolate clouds and swash a red stream of brightness
over the putty-colored water. Billy with the freckles on his ears whose
people are for Roosevelt instead of for Parker like mother is waving a
silk flag the size of a handkerchief at the men on a yellow and white
tugboat.

“Didjer see the sun rise?” he asks as if he owned it.

“You bet I saw it from my porthole,” says Jimmy walking away after a
lingering look at the silk flag. There’s land close on the other side;
nearest a green bank with trees and wide white grayroofed houses.

“Well young feller, how does it feel to be home?” asks the tweedy
gentleman with droopy mustaches.

“Is that way New York?” Jimmy points out over the still water
broadening in the sunlight.

“Yessiree-bobby, behind yonder bank of fog lies Manhattan.”

“Please sir what’s that?”

“That’s New York.... You see New York is on Manhattan Island.”

“Is it really on an island?”

“Well what do you think of a boy who dont know that his own home town
is on an island?”

The tweedy gentleman’s gold teeth glitter as he laughs with his mouth
wide open. Jimmy walks on round the deck, kicking his heels, all foamy
inside; New York’s on an island.

“You look right glad to get home little boy,” says the Southern lady.

“Oh I am, I could fall down and kiss the ground.”

“Well that’s a fine patriotic sentiment.... I’m glad to hear you say
it.”

Jimmy scalds all over. Kiss the ground, kiss the ground, echoes in his
head like a catcall. Round the deck.

“That with the yellow flag’s the quarantine boat.” A stout man with
rings on his fingers--he’s a Jew--is talking to the tweedy man. “Ha
we’re under way again.... That was quick, what?”

“We’ll be in for breakfast, an American breakfast, a good old home
breakfast.”

Muddy coming down the deck, her brown veil floating. “Here’s your
overcoat Jimmy, you’ve got to carry it.”

“Muddy, can I get out that flag?”

“What flag?”

“The silk American flag.”

“No dear it’s all put away.”

“Please I’d so like to have that flag cause it’s the Fourth of July an
everything.”

“Now dont whine Jimmy. When mother says no she means no.”

Sting of tears; he swallows a lump and looks up in her eyes.

“Jimmy it’s put away in the shawlstrap and mother’s so tired of fussing
with those wretched bags.”

“But Billy Jones has one.”

“Look deary you’re missing things.... There’s the statue of Liberty.”
A tall green woman in a dressing gown standing on an island holding up
her hand.

“What’s that in her hand?”

“That’s a light, dear ... Liberty enlightening the world.... And
there’s Governors Island the other side. There where the trees are ...
and see, that’s Brooklyn Bridge.... That is a fine sight. And look
at all the docks ... that’s the Battery ... and the masts and the
ships ... and there’s the spire of Trinity Church and the Pulitzer
building.” ... Mooing of steamboat whistles, ferries red and waddly like
ducks churning up white water, a whole train of cars on a barge pushed
by a tug chugging beside it that lets out cotton steampuffs all the
same size. Jimmy’s hands are cold and he’s chugging and chugging inside.

“Dear you mustn’t get too excited. Come on down and see if mother left
anything in the stateroom.”

Streak of water crusted with splinters, groceryboxes, orangepeel,
cabbageleaves, narrowing, narrowing between the boat and the dock. A
brass band shining in the sun, white caps, sweaty red faces, playing
Yankee Doodle. “That’s for the ambassador, you know the tall man who
never left his cabin.” Down the slanting gangplank, careful not to
trip. _Yankee Doodle went to town._... Shiny black face, white enameled
eyes, white enameled teeth. “Yas ma’am, yas ma’am” ... _Stucka feather
in his hat, an called it macaroni._.... “We have the freedom of the
port.” Blue custom officer shows a bald head bowing low ... _Tumte
boomboom_ BOOM BOOM BOOM ... _cakes and sugar candy_....

“Here’s Aunt Emily and everybody.... Dear how sweet of you to come.”

“My dear I’ve been here since six o’clock!”

“My how he’s grown.”

Light dresses, sparkle of brooches, faces poked into Jimmy’s, smell of
roses and uncle’s cigar.

“Why he’s quite a little man. Come here sir, let me look at you.”

“Well goodby Mrs. Herf. If you ever come down our way.... Jimmy I
didn’t see you kiss the ground young man.”

“Oh he’s killing, he’s so oldfashioned ... such an oldfashioned child.”

The cab smells musty, goes rumbling and lurching up a wide avenue
swirling with dust, through brick streets soursmelling full of grimy
yelling children, and all the while the trunks creak and thump on top.

“Muddy dear, you dont think it’ll break through do you?”

“No dear,” she laughs tilting her head to one side. She has pink cheeks
and her eyes sparkle under the brown veil.

“Oh muddy.” He stands up and kisses her on the chin. “What lots of
people muddy.”

“That’s on account of the Fourth of July.”

“What’s that man doing?”

“He’s been drinking dear I’m afraid.”

From a little stand draped with flags a man with white whiskers with
little red garters on his shirtsleeves is making a speech. “That’s a
Fourth of July orator.... He’s reading the Declaration of Independence.”

“Why?”

“Because it’s the Fourth of July.”

Crang! ... that’s a cannon-cracker. “That wretched boy might have
frightened the horse.... The Fourth of July dear is the day the
Declaration of Independence was signed in 1776 in the War of the
Revolution. My great grandfather Harland was killed in that war.”

A funny little train with a green engine clatters overhead.

“That’s the Elevated ... and look this is Twentythird Street ... and
the Flatiron Building.”

The cab turns sharp into a square glowering with sunlight, smelling of
asphalt and crowds and draws up before a tall door where colored men in
brass buttons run forward.

“And here we are at the Fifth Avenue Hotel.”

Icecream at Uncle Jeff’s, cold sweet peachy taste thick against the
roof of the mouth. Funny after you’ve left the ship you can still
feel the motion. Blue chunks of dusk melting into the squarecut
uptown streets. Rockets spurting bright in the blue dusk, colored
balls falling, Bengal fire, Uncle Jeff tacking pinwheels on the tree
outside the apartmenthouse door, lighting them with his cigar. Roman
candles you have to hold. “Be sure and turn your face away, kiddo.”
Hot thud and splutter in your hands, eggshaped balls soaring, red,
yellow, green, smell of powder and singed paper. Down the fizzing
glowing street a bell clangs, clangs nearer, clangs faster. Hoofs
of lashed horses striking sparks, a fire engine roars by, round the
corner red and smoking and brassy. “Must be on Broadway.” After it
the hookandladder and the firechief’s highpacing horses. Then the
tinkletinkle of an ambulance. “Somebody got his.”

The box is empty, gritty powder and sawdust get under your nails when
you feel along it, it’s empty, no there are still some little wooden
fire engines on wheels. Really truly fire engines. “We must set these
off Uncle Jeff. Oh these are the best of all Uncle Jeff.” They have
squibs in them and go sizzling off fast over the smooth asphalt of the
street, pushed by sparkling plumed fiery tails, leaving smoke behind
some real fire engines.

Tucked into bed in a tall unfriendly room, with hot eyes and aching
legs. “Growing pains darling,” muddy said when she tucked him in,
leaning over him in a glimmering silk dress with drooping sleeves.

“Muddy what’s that little black patch on your face?”

“That,” she laughed and her necklace made a tiny tinkling, “is to make
mother look prettier.”

He lay there hemmed by tall nudging wardrobes and dressers. From
outside came the sound of wheels and shouting, and once in a while a
band of music in the distance. His legs ached as if they’d fall off,
and when he closed his eyes he was speeding through flaring blackness
on a red fire engine that shot fire and sparks and colored balls out of
its sizzling tail.

The July sun pricked out the holes in the worn shades on the office
windows. Gus McNiel sat in the morrischair with his crutches between
his knees. His face was white and puffy from months in hospital. Nellie
in a straw hat with red poppies rocked herself to and fro in the swivel
chair at the desk.

“Better come an set by me Nellie. That lawyer might not like it if he
found yez at his desk.”

She wrinkled up her nose and got to her feet. “Gus I declare you’re
scared to death.”

“You’d be scared too if you’d had what I’d had wid de railroad doctor
pokin me and alookin at me loike I was a jailbird and the Jew doctor
the lawyer got tellin me as I was totally in-cap-aciated. Gorry I’m all
in. I think he was lyin though.”

“Gus you do as I tell ye. Keep yer mouth shut an let the other guys do
the talkin’.”

“Sure I wont let a peep outa me.”

Nellie stood behind his chair and began stroking the crisp hair back
from his forehead.

“It’ll be great to be home again, Nellie, wid your cookin an all.” He
put an arm round her waist and drew her to him.

“Juss think, maybe I wont have to do any.”

“I don’t think I’d loike that so well.... Gosh if we dont git that
money I dunno how we’ll make out.”

“Oh pop’ll help us like he’s been doin.”

“Hope to the Lord I aint goin to be sick all me loife.”

George Baldwin came in slamming the glass door behind him. He stood
looking at the man and his wife a second with his hands in his pockets.
Then he said quietly smiling:

“Well it’s done people. As soon as the waiver of any further claims
is signed the railroad’s attorneys will hand me a check for twelve
thousand five hundred. That’s what we finally compromised on.”

“Twelve thousand iron men,” gasped Gus. “Twelve thousand five hundred.
Say wait a second.... Hold me crutches while I go out an git run over
again.... Wait till I tell McGillycuddy about it. The ole divil’ll be
throwin hisself in front of a market train.... Well Mr. Baldwin sir,”
Gus propped himself onto his feet.... “you’re a great man.... Aint he
Nellie?”

“To be sure he is.”

Baldwin tried to keep from looking her in the eye. Spurts of jangling
agitation were going through him, making his legs feel weak and trembly.

“I’ll tell yez what let’s do,” said Gus. “Sposin we all take a horsecab
up to ole McGillycuddy’s an have somethin to wet our whistles in the
private bar.... My treat. I need a bit of a drink to cheer me up. Come
on Nellie.”

“I wish I could,” said Baldwin, “but I’m afraid I cant. I’m pretty busy
these days. But just give me your signature before you go and I’ll have
the check for you tomorrow.... Sign here ... and here.”

McNiel had stumped over to the desk and was leaning over the papers.
Baldwin felt that Nellie was trying to make a sign to him. He kept his
eyes down. After they had left he noticed her purse, a little leather
purse with pansies burned on the back, on the corner of the desk. There
was a tap on the glass door. He opened.

“Why wouldn’t you look at me?” she said breathlessly low.

“How could I with him here.” He held the purse out to her.

She put her arms round his neck and kissed him hard on the mouth. “What
are we goin to do? Shall I come in this afternoon? Gus’ll be liquorin
up to get himself sick again now he’s out of the hospital.”

“No I cant Nellie.... Business ... business.... I’m busy every minute.”

“Oh yes you are.... All right have it your own way.” She slammed the
door.

Baldwin sat at his desk biting his knuckles without seeing the pile
of papers he was staring at. “I’ve got to cut it out,” he said aloud
and got to his feet. He paced back and forth across the narrow office
looking at the shelves of lawbooks and the Gibson girl calendar over
the telephone and the dusty square of sunlight by the window. He looked
at his watch. Lunchtime. He drew the palm of a hand over his forehead
and went to the telephone.

“Rector 1237.... Mr. Sandbourne there?... Say Phil suppose I come by
for you for lunch? Do you want to go out right now?... Sure.... Say
Phil I clinched it, I got the milkman his damages. I’m pleased as the
dickens. I’ll set you up to a regular lunch on the strength of it...
So long....”

He came away from the telephone smiling, took his hat off its hook,
fitted it carefully on his head in front of the little mirror over the
hatrack, and hurried down the stairs.

On the last flight he met Mr. Emery of Emery & Emery who had their
offices on the first floor.

“Well Mr. Baldwin how’s things?” Mr. Emery of Emery & Emery was a
flatfaced man with gray hair and eyebrows and a protruding wedgeshaped
jaw. “Pretty well sir, pretty well.”

“They tell me you are doing mighty well.... Something about the New
York Central Railroad.”

“Oh Simsbury and I settled it out of court.”

“Humph,” said Mr. Emery of Emery & Emery.

As they were about to part in the street Mr. Emery said suddenly “Would
you care to dine with me and my wife some time?”

“Why ... er ... I’d be delighted.”

“I like to see something of the younger fellows in the profession you
understand.... Well I’ll drop you a line.... Some evening next week. It
would give us a chance to have a chat.”

Baldwin shook a blueveined hand in a shinystarched cuff and went off
down Maiden Lane hustling with a springy step through the noon crowd.
On Pearl Street he climbed a steep flight of black stairs that smelt of
roasting coffee and knocked on a groundglass door.

“Come in,” shouted a bass voice. A swarthy man lanky in his
shirtsleeves strode forward to meet him. “Hello George, thought you
were never comin’. I’m hongry as hell.”

“Phil I’m going to set you up to the best lunch you ever ate in your
life.”

“Well I’m juss waitin’ to be set.”

Phil Sandbourne put on his coat, knocked the ashes out of his pipe on
the corner of a draftingtable, and shouted into a dark inner office,
“Goin out to eat, Mr. Specker.”

“All right go ahead,” replied a goaty quavering from the inner office.

“How’s the old man?” asked Baldwin as they went out the door.

“Ole Specker? Bout on his last legs ... but he’s been thataway for
years poa ole soul. Honest George I’d feel mighty mean if anythin
happened to poa ole Specker.... He’s the only honest man in the city of
New York, an he’s got a head on his shoulders too.”

“He’s never made anything much by it,” said Baldwin.

“He may yet.... He may yet.... Man you ought to see his plans for
allsteel buildins. He’s got an idea the skyscraper of the future’ll be
built of steel and glass. We’ve been experimenting with vitrous tile
recently.... cristamighty some of his plans would knock yer eye out....
He’s got a great sayin about some Roman emperor who found Rome of brick
and left it of marble. Well he says he’s found New York of brick an
that he’s goin to leave it of steel ... steel an glass. I’ll have to
show you his project for a rebuilt city. It’s some pipedream.”

They settled on a cushioned bench in the corner of the restaurant that
smelled of steak and the grill. Sandbourne stretched his legs out under
the table.

“Wow this is luxury,” he said.

“Phil let’s have a cocktail,” said Baldwin from behind the bill of
fare. “I tell you Phil, it’s the first five years that’s the hardest.”

“You needn’t worry George, you’re the hustlin kind.... I’m the ole
stick in the mud.”

“I don’t see why, you can always get a job as a draftsman.”

“That’s a fine future I muss say, to spend ma life with the corner of a
draftintable stuck in ma bally.... Christ-amighty man!”

“Well Specker and Sandbourne may be a famous firm yet.”

“People’ll be goin round in flyin machines by that time an you and
me’ll be laid out with our toes to the daisies.”

“Here’s luck anyway.”

“Here’s lead in yer pencil, George.”

They drank down the Martinis and started eating their oysters.

“I wonder if it’s true that oysters turn to leather in your stomach
when you drink alcohol with em.”

“Search me.... Say by the way Phil how are you getting on with that
little stenographer you were taking out?”

“Man the food an drink an theaters I’ve wasted on that lil girl....
She’s got me run to a standstill.... Honest she has. You’re a sensible
feller, George, to keep away from the women.”

“Maybe,” said Baldwin slowly and spat an olive stone into his clenched
fist.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first thing they heard was the quavering whistle that came from a
little wagon at the curb opposite the entrance to the ferry. A small
boy broke away from the group of immigrants that lingered in the
ferryhouse and ran over to the little wagon.

“Sure it’s like a steam engine an its fulla monkeynuts,” he yelled
running back.

“Padraic you stay here.”

“And this here’s the L station, South Ferry,” went on Tim Halloran who
had come down to meet them. “Up thataway’s Battery Park an Bowling
Green an Wall Street an th’ financial district.... Come along Padraic
your Uncle Timothy’s goin to take ye on th’ Ninth Avenoo L.”

There were only three people left at the ferrylanding, an old woman
with a blue handkerchief on her head and a young woman with a magenta
shawl, standing at either end of a big corded trunk studded with brass
tacks; and an old man with a greenish stub of a beard and a face lined
and twisted like the root of a dead oak. The old woman was whimpering
with wet eyes: “Dove andiamo Madonna mia, Madonna mia?” The young
woman was unfolding a letter blinking at the ornate writing. Suddenly
she went over to the old man, “Non posso leggere,” holding out the
letter to him. He wrung his hands, letting his head roll back and
forth, saying over and over again something she couldn’t understand.
She shrugged her shoulders and smiled and went back to the trunk. A
Sicilian with sideburns was talking to the old woman. He grabbed the
trunk by its cord and pulled it over to a spring wagon with a white
horse that stood across the street. The two women followed the trunk.
The Sicilian held out his hand to the young woman. The old woman still
muttering and whimpering hoisted herself painfully onto the back of the
wagon. When the Sicilian leaned over to read the letter he nudged the
young woman with his shoulder. She stiffened. “Awright,” he said. Then
as he shook the reins on the horse’s back he turned back towards the
old woman and shouted, “Cinque le due.... Awright.”




IV. Tracks

          _The rumpetybump rumpetybump spaced out, slackened; bumpers
          banged all down the train. The man dropped off the rods. He
          couldnt move for stiffness. It was pitchblack. Very slowly
          he crawled out, hoisted himself to his knees, to his feet
          until he leaned panting against the freightcar. His body
          was not his own; his muscles were smashed wood, his bones
          were twisted rods. A lantern burst his eyes._

          “_Get outa here quick yous. Company detectives is beatin
          through de yards._”

          “_Say feller, is this New York?_”

          “_You’re goddam right it is. Juss foller my lantern; you
          kin git out along de waterfront._”

          _His feet could barely stumble through the long gleaming
          v’s and crisscrossed lines of tracks, he tripped and fell
          over a bundle of signal rods. At last he was sitting on the
          edge of a wharf with his head in his hands. The water made
          a soothing noise against the piles like the lapping of a
          dog. He took a newspaper out of his pocket and unwrapped
          a hunk of bread and a slice of gristly meat. He ate them
          dry, chewing and chewing before he could get any moisture
          in his mouth. Then he got unsteadily to his feet, brushed
          the crumbs off his knees, and looked about him. Southward
          beyond the tracks the murky sky was drenched with orange
          glow._

          “_The Gay White Way,” he said aloud in a croaking voice.
          “The Gay White Way._”


Through the rainstriped window Jimmy Herf was watching the umbrellas
bob in the slowly swirling traffic that flowed up Broadway. There was a
knock at the door; “Come in,” said Jimmy and turned back to the
window when he saw that the waiter wasn’t Pat. The waiter switched
on the light. Jimmy saw him reflected in the windowpane, a lean
spikyhaired man holding aloft in one hand the dinnertray on which
the silver covers were grouped like domes. Breathing hard the waiter
advanced into the room dragging a folding stand after him with his free
hand. He jerked open the stand, set the tray on it and laid a cloth on
the round table. A greasy pantry smell came from him. Jimmy waited till
he’d gone to turn round. Then he walked about the table tipping up the
silver covers; soup with little green things in it, roast lamb, mashed
potatoes, mashed turnips, spinach, no desert either.

“Muddy.” “Yes deary,” the voice wailed frailly through the folding
doors.

“Dinner’s ready mother dear.”

“You begin darling boy, I’ll be right in....”

“But I dont want to begin without you mother.”

He walked round the table straightening knives and forks. He put a
napkin over his arm. The head waiter at Delmonico’s was arranging the
table for Graustark and the Blind King of Bohemia and Prince Henry the
Navigator and ...

“Mother who d’you want to be Mary Queen of Scots or Lady Jane Grey?”

“But they both had their heads chopped off honey.... I dont want to
have my head chopped off.” Mother had on her salmoncolored teagown.
When she opened the folding doors a wilted smell of cologne and
medicines seeped out of the bedroom, trailed after her long lacefringed
sleeves. She had put a little too much powder on her face, but her
hair, her lovely brown hair was done beautifully. They sat down
opposite one another; she set a plate of soup in front of him, lifting
it between two long blueveined hands.

He ate the soup that was watery and not hot enough. “Oh I forgot the
croûtons, honey.”

“Muddy ... mother why arent you eating your soup?”

“I dont seem to like it much this evening. I couldn’t think what to
order tonight my head ached so. It doesn’t matter.”

“Would you rather be Cleopatra? She had a wonderful appetite and ate
everything that was put before her like a good little girl.”

“Even pearls.... She put a pearl in a glass of vinegar and drank it
down....” Her voice trembled. She stretched out her hand to him across
the table; he patted her hand manfully and smiled. “Only you and me
Jimmy boy.... Honey you’ll always love your mother wont you?”

“What’s the matter muddy dear?”

“Oh nothing; I feel strange this evening.... Oh I’m so tired of never
really feeling well.”

“But after you’ve had your operation....”

“Oh yes after I’ve had my operation.... Deary there’s a paper of fresh
butter on the windowledge in the bathroom.... I’ll put some on these
turnips if you fetch it for me.... I’m afraid I’ll have to complain
about the food again. This lamb’s not all it should be; I hope it wont
make us sick.”

Jimmy ran through the folding doors and his mother’s room into the
little passage that smelled of mothballs and silky bits of clothing
littered on a chair; the red rubber tubing of a douche swung in his
face as he opened the bathroom door; the whiff of medicines made his
ribs contract with misery. He pushed up the window at the end of the
tub. The ledge was gritty and feathery specks of soot covered the plate
turned up over the butter. He stood a moment staring down the airshaft,
breathing through his mouth to keep from smelling the coalgas that
rose from the furnaces. Below him a maid in a white cap leaned out of
a window and talked to one of the furnacemen who stood looking up at
her with his bare grimy arms crossed over his chest. Jimmy strained his
ears to hear what they were saying; to be dirty and handle coal all day
and have grease in your hair and up to your armpits.

“Jimmee!”

“Coming mother.” Blushing he slammed down the window and walked back
to the sittingroom, slowly so that the red would have time to fade out
of his face.

“Dreaming again, Jimmy. My little dreamer.”

He put the butter beside his mother’s plate and sat down.

“Hurry up and eat your lamb while it’s hot. Why dont you try a little
French mustard on it? It’ll make it taste better.”

The mustard burnt his tongue, brought tears to his eyes.

“Is it too hot?” mother asked laughing. “You must learn to like hot
things.... He always liked hot things.”

“Who mother?”

“Someone I loved very much.”

They were silent. He could hear himself chewing. A few rattling sounds
of cabs and trolleycars squirmed in brokenly through the closed
windows. The steampipes knocked and hissed. Down the airshaft the
furnaceman with grease up to his armpits was spitting words out of his
wabbly mouth up at the maid in the starched cap--dirty words. Mustard’s
the color of ...

“A penny for your thoughts.”

“I wasn’t thinking of anything.”

“We mustn’t have any secrets from each other dear. Remember you’re the
only comfort your mother has in the world.”

“I wonder what it’d be like to be a seal, a little harbor seal.”

“Very chilly I should think.”

“But you wouldn’t feel it.... Seals are protected by a layer of blubber
so that they’re always warm even sitting on an iceberg. But it would be
such fun to swim around in the sea whenever you wanted to. They travel
thousands of miles without stopping.”

“But mother’s traveled thousands of miles without stopping and so have
you.”

“When?”

“Going abroad and coming back.” She was laughing at him with bright
eyes.

“Oh but that’s in a boat.”

“And when we used to go cruising on the _Mary Stuart_.”

“Oh tell me about that muddy.”

There was a knock. “Come.” The spikyhaired waiter put his head in the
door.

“Can I clear mum?”

“Yes and bring me some fruit salad and see that the fruit is fresh
cut.... Things are wretched this evening.”

Puffing, the waiter was piling dishes on the tray. “I’m sorry mum,” he
puffed.

“All right, I know it’s not your fault waiter.... What’ll you have
Jimmy?”

“May I have a meringue glacé muddy?”

“All right if you’ll be very good.”

“Yea,” Jimmy let out a yell.

“Darling you mustn’t shout like that at table.”

“But we dont mind when there are just the two of us.... Hooray meringue
glacé.”

“James a gentleman always behaves the same way whether he’s in his own
home or in the wilds of Africa.”

“Gee I wish we were in the wilds of Africa.”

“I’d be terrified, dear.”

“I’d shout like that and scare away all the lions and tigers.... Yes I
would.”

The waiter came back with two plates on the tray. “I’m sorry mum but
meringue glacé’s all out.... I brought the young gentleman chocolate
icecream instead.”

“Oh mother.”

“Never mind dear.... It would have been too rich anyway.... You eat
that and I’ll let you run out after dinner and buy some candy.”

“Oh goody.”

“But dont eat the icecream too fast or you’ll have collywobbles.”

“I’m all through.”

“You bolted it you little wretch.... Put on your rubbers honey.”

“But it’s not raining at all.”

“Do as mother wants you dear.... And please dont be long. I put you on
your honor to come right back. Mother’s not a bit well tonight and she
gets so nervous when you’re out in the street. There are such terrible
dangers....”

He sat down to pull on his rubbers. While he was snapping them tight
over his heels she came to him with a dollar bill. She put her arm with
its long silky sleeve round his shoulder. “Oh my darling.”

She was crying.

“Mother you mustnt.” He squeezed her hard; he could feel the ribs
of her corset against his arms. “I’ll be back in a minute, in the
teenciest weenciest minute.”

On the stairs where a brass rod held the dull crimson carpet in place
on each step, Jimmy pulled off his rubbers and stuffed them into the
pockets of his raincoat. With his head in the air he hurried through
the web of prying glances of the bellhops on the bench beside the
desk. “Goin fer a walk?” the youngest lighthaired bellhop asked him.
Jimmy nodded wisely, slipped past the staring buttons of the doorman
and out onto Broadway full of clangor and footsteps and faces putting
on shadowmasks when they slid out of the splotches of light from
stores and arclamps. He walked fast uptown past the Ansonia. In the
doorway lounged a blackbrowed man with a cigar in his mouth, maybe a
kidnapper. But nice people live in the Ansonia like where we live.
Next a telegraph office, drygoods stores, a dyers and cleaners, a
Chinese laundry sending out a scorched mysterious steamy smell. He
walks faster, the chinks are terrible kidnappers. Footpads. A man with
a can of coaloil brushes past him, a greasy sleeve brushes against his
shoulder, smells of sweat and coaloil; suppose he’s a firebug. The
thought of firebug gives him gooseflesh. Fire. Fire.

Huyler’s; there’s a comfortable fudgy odor mixed with the smell of
nickel and wellwiped marble outside the door, and the smell of cooking
chocolate curls warmly from the gratings under the windows. Black and
orange crêpepaper favors for Hallowe’en. He is just going in when he
thinks of the Mirror place two blocks further up, those little silver
steamengines and automobiles they give you with your change. I’ll
hurry; on rollerskates it’d take less time, you could escape from
bandits, thugs, holdupmen, on rollerskates, shooting over your shoulder
with a long automatic, bing ... one of em down! that’s the worst of
em, bing ... there’s another; the rollerskates are magic rollerskates,
whee ... up the brick walls of the houses, over the roofs, vaulting
chimneys, up the Flatiron Building, scooting across the cables of
Brooklyn Bridge.

Mirror candies; this time he goes in without hesitating. He stands at
the counter a while before anyone comes to wait on him. “Please a pound
of sixty cents a pound mixed chocolate creams,” he rattled off. She is
a blond lady, a little crosseyed, and looks at him spitefully without
answering. “Please I’m in a hurry if you dont mind.”

“All right, everybody in their turn,” she snaps. He stands blinking at
her with flaming cheeks. She pushes him a box all wrapped up with a
check on it “Pay at the desk.” I’m not going to cry. The lady at the
desk is small and grey-haired. She takes his dollar through a little
door like the little doors little animals go in and out of in the Small
Mammal House. The cash register makes a cheerful tinkle, glad to get
the money. A quarter, a dime, a nickel and a little cup, is that forty
cents? But only a little cup instead of a steamengine or an automobile.
He picks up the money and leaves the little cup and hurries out with
the box under his arm. Mother’ll say I’ve been too long. He walks home
looking straight ahead of him, smarting from the meanness of the blond
lady.

“Ha ... been out abuyin candy,” said the lighthaired bellhop. “I’ll
give you some if you come up later,” whispered Jimmy as he passed. The
brass rods rang when he kicked them running up the stairs. Outside the
chocolate-colored door that had 503 on it in white enameled letters he
remembered his rubbers. He set the candy on the floor and pulled them
on over his damp shoes. Lucky Muddy wasn’t waiting for him with the
door open. Maybe she’d seen him coming from the window.

“Mother.” She wasn’t in the sittingroom. He was terrified. She’d gone
out, she’d gone away. “Mother!”

“Come here dear,” came her voice weakly from the bedroom.

He pulled off his hat and raincoat and rushed in. “Mother what’s the
matter?”

“Nothing honey.... I’ve a headache that’s all, a terrible headache....
Put some cologne on a handkerchief and put it on my head nicely, and
dont please dear get it in my eye the way you did last time.”

She lay on the bed in a skyblue wadded wrapper. Her face was purplish
pale. The silky salmoncolored teagown hung limp over a chair; on the
floor lay her corsets in a tangle of pink strings. Jimmy put the wet
handkerchief carefully on her forehead. The cologne reeked strong,
prickling his nostrils as he leaned over her.

“That’s so good,” came her voice feebly. “Dear call up Aunt Emily,
Riverside 2466, and ask her if she can come round this evening. I want
to talk to her.... Oh my head’s bursting.”

His heart thumping terribly and tears blearing his eyes he went to the
telephone. Aunt Emily’s voice came unexpectedly soon.

“Aunt Emily mother’s kinder sick.... She wants you to come around....
She’s coming right away mother dear,” he shouted, “isn’t that fine?
She’s coming right around.” He tiptoed back into his mother’s room,
picked up the corset and the teagown and hung them in the wardrobe.

“Deary” came her frail voice “take the hairpins out of my hair, they
hurt my head.... Oh honeyboy I feel as if my head would burst....” He
felt gently through her brown hair that was silkier than the teagown
and pulled out the hairpins.

“Ou dont, you are hurting me.”

“Mother I didn’t mean to.”

Aunt Emily, thin in a blue mackintosh thrown over her evening dress,
hurried into the room, her thin mouth in a pucker of sympathy. She
saw her sister lying twisted with pain on the bed and the skinny
whitefaced boy in short pants standing beside her with his hands full
of hairpins.

“What is it Lil?” she asked quietly.

“My dear something terrible’s the matter with me,” came Lily Herf’s
voice in a gasping hiss.

“James,” said Aunt Emily harshly, “you must run off to bed.... Mother
needs perfect quiet.”

“Good night muddy dear,” he said.

Aunt Emily patted him on the back. “Dont worry James I’ll attend to
everything.” She went to the telephone and began calling a number in a
low precise voice.

The box of candy was on the parlor table; Jimmy felt guilty when he put
it under his arm. As he passed the bookcase he snatched out a volume
of the American Cyclopædia and tucked it under the other arm. His aunt
did not notice when he went out the door. The dungeon gates opened.
Outside was an Arab stallion and two trusty retainers waiting to speed
him across the border to freedom. Three doors down was his room. It was
stuffed with silent chunky darkness. The light switched on obediently
lighting up the cabin of the schooner _Mary Stuart_. All right Captain
weigh anchor and set your course for the Windward Isles and dont
let me be disturbed before dawn; I have important papers to peruse.
He tore off his clothes and knelt beside the bed in his pyjamas.
Nowilaymedowntosleep Ipraythelordmysoultokeep Ifishoulddiebeforeiwake
Ipraythelordmysoultotake.

Then he opened the box of candy and set the pillows together at the end
of the bed under the light. His teeth broke through the chocolate into
a squashysweet filling. Let’s see ...

     A the first of the vowels, the first letter in all written
     alphabets except the Amharic or Abyssinian, of which it is
     the thirteenth, and the Runic of which it is the tenth....

Darn it that’s a hairy one....

     AA, Aachen (see Aix-la-Chapelle).

     Aardvark ...

Gee he’s funny looking ...

     (orycteropus capensis), a plantigrade animal of the class
     mammalia, order edentata, peculiar to Africa.

     Abd,

     Abd-el-halim, an Egyptian prince, son of Mehmet Ali and a
     white slave woman....

His cheeks burned as he read:

     The Queen of the White Slaves.

     Abdomen (lat. of undetermined etymology) ... the lower part
     of the body included between the level of the diaphragm and
     that of the pelvis....

     Abelard ... The relation of master and pupil was not long
     preserved. A warmer sentiment than esteem filled their
     hearts and the unlimited opportunities of intercourse
     which were afforded them by the canon who confided in
     Abelard’s age (he was now almost forty), and in his public
     character, were fatal to the peace of both. The condition
     of Heloise was on the point of betraying their intimacy....
     Fulbert now abandoned himself to a transport of savage
     vindictiveness ... burst into Abelard’s chamber with a band
     of ruffians and gratified his revenge by inflicting on him
     an atrocious mutilation....

     Abelites ... denounced sexual intercourse as service of
     Satan.

     Abimelech I, son of Gideon by a Sheshemite concubine, who
     made himself king after murdering all his seventy brethren
     except Jotham, and was killed while besieging the tower of
     Thebez ...

     Abortion ...

No; his hands were icy and he felt a little sick from stuffing down so
many chocolates.

     Abracadabra.

     Abydos ...

He got up to drink a glass of water before Abyssinia with engravings of
desert mountains and the burning of Magdala by the British.

His eyes smarted. He was stiff and sleepy. He looked at his Ingersoll.
Eleven o’clock. Terror gripped him suddenly. If mother was dead...?
He pressed his face into the pillow. She stood over him in her white
ballgown that had lace crisply on it and a train sweeping behind on
satin rustling ruffles and her hand softly fragrant gently stroked his
cheek. A rush of sobs choked him. He tossed on the bed with his face
shoved hard into the knotty pillow. For a long time he couldn’t stop
crying.

He woke up to find the light burning dizzily and the room stuffy and
hot. The book was on the floor and the candy squashed under him oozing
stickily from its box. The watch had stopped at 1.45. He opened the
window, put the chocolates in the bureau drawer and was about to
snap off the light when he remembered. Shivering with terror he put
on his bathrobe and slippers and tiptoed down the darkened hall. He
listened outside the door. People were talking low. He knocked faintly
and turned the knob. A hand pulled the door open hard and Jimmy was
blinking in the face of a tall cleanshaven man with gold eyeglasses.
The folding doors were closed; in front of them stood a starched nurse.

“James dear, go back to bed and dont worry,” said Aunt Emily in a tired
whisper. “Mother’s very ill and must be absolutely quiet, but there’s
no more danger.”

“Not for the present at least, Mrs. Merivale,” said the doctor
breathing on his eyeglasses.

“The little dear,” came the nurse’s voice low and purry and reassuring,
“he’s been sitting up worrying all night and he never bothered us once.”

“I’ll go back and tuck you into bed,” said Aunt Emily. “My James always
likes that.”

“May I see mother, just a peek so’s I’ll know she’s all right.” Jimmy
looked up timidly at the big face with the eyeglasses.

The doctor nodded. “Well I must go.... I shall drop by at four or
five to see how things go.... Goodnight Mrs. Merivale. Goodnight Miss
Billings. Goodnight son....”

“This way....” The trained nurse put her hand on Jimmy’s shoulder. He
wriggled out from under and walked behind her.

There was a light on in the corner of mother’s room shaded by a towel
pinned round it. From the bed came the rasp of breathing he did not
recognize. Her crumpled face was towards him, the closed eyelids
violet, the mouth screwed to one side. For a half a minute he stared at
her. “All right I’ll go back to bed now,” he whispered to the nurse.
His blood pounded deafeningly. Without looking at his aunt or at the
nurse he walked stiffly to the outer door. His aunt said something.
He ran down the corridor to his own room, slammed the door and bolted
it. He stood stiff and cold in the center of the room with his fists
clenched. “I hate them. I hate them,” he shouted aloud. Then gulping
a dry sob he turned out the light and slipped into bed between the
shiverycold sheets.

       *       *       *       *       *

“With all the business you have, madame,” Emile was saying in a
singsong voice, “I should think you’d need someone to help you with the
store.”

“I know that ... I’m killing myself with work; I know that,” sighed
Madame Rigaud from her stool at the cashdesk. Emile was silent a long
time staring at the cross section of a Westphalia ham that lay on a
marble slab beside his elbow. Then he said timidly: “A woman like you,
a beautiful woman like you, Madame Rigaud, is never without friends.”

“Ah ça.... I have lived too much in my time.... I have no more
confidence.... Men are a set of brutes, and women, Oh I dont get on
with women a bit!”

“History and literature ...” began Emile.

The bell on the top of the door jangled. A man and a woman stamped into
the shop. She had yellow hair and a hat like a flowerbed.

“Now Billy dont be extravagant,” she was saying.

“But Norah we got have sumpen te eat.... An I’ll be all jake by
Saturday.”

“Nutten’ll be jake till you stop playin the ponies.”

“Aw go long wud yer.... Let’s have some liverwurst.... My that cold
breast of turkey looks good....”

“Piggywiggy,” cooed the yellowhaired girl.

“Lay off me will ye, I’m doing this.”

“Yes sir ze breast of turkee is veree goud.... We ave ole cheekens too,
steel ’ot.... Emile mong ami cherchez moi uns de ces petits poulets
dans la cuisin-e.” Madame Rigaud spoke like an oracle without moving
from her stool by the cashdesk. The man was fanning himself with a
thickbrimmed straw hat that had a checked band.

“Varm tonight,” said Madame Rigaud.

“It sure is.... Norah we ought to have gone down to the Island instead
of bummin round this town.”

“Billy you know why we couldn’t go perfectly well.”

“Don’t rub it in. Aint I tellin ye it’ll be all jake by Saturday.”

“History and literature,” continued Emile when the customers had gone
off with the chicken, leaving Madame Rigaud a silver half dollar to
lock up in the till ... “history and literature teach us that there
are friendships, that there sometimes comes love that is worthy of
confidence....”

“History and literature!” Madame Rigaud growled with internal laughter.
“A lot of good that’ll do us.”

“But dont you ever feel lonely in a big foreign city like this...?
Everything is so hard. Women look in your pocket not in your heart....
I cant stand it any more.”

Madame Rigaud’s broad shoulders and her big breasts shook with
laughter. Her corsets creaked when she lifted herself still laughing
off the stool. “Emile, you’re a good-looking fellow and steady and
you’ll get on in the world.... But I’ll never put myself in a man’s
power again.... I’ve suffered too much.... Not if you came to me with
five thousand dollars.”

“You’re a very cruel woman.”

Madame Rigaud laughed again. “Come along now, you can help me close up.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Sunday weighed silent and sunny over downtown. Baldwin sat at his desk
in his shirtsleeves reading a calfbound lawbook. Now and then he wrote
down a note on a scratchpad in a wide regular hand. The phone rang loud
in the hot stillness. He finished the paragraph he was reading and
strode over to answer it.

“Yes I’m here alone, come on over if you want to.” He put down the
receiver. “God damn it,” he muttered through clenched teeth.

Nellie came in without knocking, found him pacing back and forth in
front of the window.

“Hello Nellie,” he said without looking up; she stood still staring at
him.

“Look here Georgy this cant go on.”

“Why cant it?”

“I’m sick of always pretendin an deceivin.”

“Nobody’s found out anything, have they?”

“Oh of course not.”

She went up to him and straightened his necktie. He kissed her gently
on the mouth. She wore a frilled muslin dress of a reddish lilac color
and had a blue sunshade in her hand.

“How’s things Georgy?”

“Wonderful. D’you know, you people have brought me luck? I’ve got
several good cases on hand now and I’ve made some very valuable
connections.”

“Little luck it’s brought me. I haven’t dared go to confession yet. The
priest’ll be thinkin I’ve turned heathen.”

“How’s Gus?”

“Oh full of his plans.... Might think he’d earned the money, he’s
gettin that cocky about it.”

“Look Nellie how would it be if you left Gus and came and lived with
me? You could get a divorce and we could get married.... Everything
would be all right then.”

“Like fun it would.... You dont mean it anyhow.”

“But it’s been worth it Nellie, honestly it has.” He put his arms round
her and kissed her hard still lips. She pushed him away.

“Anyways I aint comin here again.... Oh I was so happy comin up the
stairs thinkin about seein you.... You’re paid an the business is all
finished.”

He noticed that the little curls round her forehead were loose. A wisp
of hair hung over one eyebrow.

“Nellie we mustn’t part bitterly like this.”

“Why not will ye tell me?”

“Because we’ve both loved one another.”

“I’m not goin to cry.” She patted her nose with a little rolledup
handkerchief. “Georgy I’m goin to hate ye.... Goodby.” The door snapped
sharply to behind her.

Baldwin sat at his desk and chewed the end of a pencil. A faint
pungence of her hair lingered in his nostrils. His throat was stiff
and lumpy. He coughed. The pencil fell out of his mouth. He wiped the
saliva off with his handkerchief and settled himself in his chair. From
bleary the crowded paragraphs of the lawbook became clear. He tore
the written sheet off the scratchpad and clipped it to the top of a
pile of documents. On the new sheet he began: Decision of the Supreme
Court of the State of New York.... Suddenly he sat up straight in his
chair, and started biting the end of his pencil again. From outside
came the endless sultry whistle of a peanut wagon. “Oh well, that’s
that,” he said aloud. He went on writing in a wide regular hand: Case
of Patterson vs. The State of New York.... Decision of the Supreme ...

       *       *       *       *       *

Bud sat by a window in the Seamen’s Union reading slowly and carefully
through a newspaper. Next him two men with freshly shaved rawsteak
cheeks cramped into white collars and blue serge storesuits were
ponderously playing chess. One of them smoked a pipe that made a little
clucking noise when he drew on it. Outside rain beat incessantly on a
wide glimmering square.

     Banzai, live a thousand years, cried the little gray men
     of the fourth platoon of Japanese sappers as they advanced
     to repair the bridge over the Yalu River ... Special
     correspondent of the New York Herald ...

“Checkmate,” said the man with the pipe. “Damn it all let’s go have a
drink. This is no night to be sitting here sober.”

“I promised the ole woman ...”

“None o that crap Jess, I know your kinda promises.” A big crimson hand
thickly furred with yellow hairs brushed the chessmen into their box.
“Tell the ole woman you had to have a nip to keep the weather out.”

“That’s no lie neither.”

Bud watched their shadows hunched into the rain pass the window.

“What you name?”

Bud turned sharp from the window startled by a shrill squeaky voice
in his ear. He was looking into the fireblue eyes of a little yellow
man who had a face like a toad, large mouth, protruding eyes and thick
closecropped black hair.

Bud’s jaw set. “My name’s Smith, what about it?”

The little man held out a square callouspalmed hand, “Plis to meet yez.
Me Matty.”

Bud took the hand in spite of himself. It squeezed his until he winced.
“Matty what?” he asked. “Me juss Matty ... Laplander Matty ... Come
have drink.”

“I’m flat,” said Bud. “Aint got a red cent.”

“On me. Me too much money, take some....” Matty shoved a hand into
either pocket of his baggy checked suit and punched Bud in the chest
with two fistfuls of greenbacks.

“Aw keep yer money ... I’ll take a drink with yous though.”

By the time they got to the saloon on the corner of Pearl Street Bud’s
elbows and knees were soaked and a trickle of cold rain was running
down his neck. When they went up to the bar Laplander Matty put down a
five dollar bill.

“Me treat everybody; very happy yet tonight.”

Bud was tackling the free lunch. “Hadn’t et in a dawg’s age,” he
explained when he went back to the bar to take his drink. The whisky
burnt his throat all the way down, dried wet clothes and made him
feel the way he used to feel when he was a kid and got off to go to a
baseball game Saturday afternoon.

“Put it there Lap,” he shouted slapping the little man’s broad back.
“You an me’s friends from now on.”

“Hey landlubber, tomorrow me an you ship togezzer. What say?”

“Sure we will.”

“Now we go up Bowery Street look at broads. Me pay.”

“Aint a Bowery broad would go wid yer, ye little Yap,” shouted a tall
drunken man with drooping black mustaches who had lurched in between
them as they swayed in the swinging doors.

“Zey vont, vont zey?” said the Lap hauling off. One of his hammershaped
fists shot in a sudden uppercut under the man’s jaw. The man rose off
his feet and soared obliquely in through the swinging doors that closed
on him. A shout went up from inside the saloon.

“I’ll be a sonofabitch, Lappy, I’ll be a sonofabitch,” roared Bud and
slapped him on the back again.

Arm in arm they careened up Pearl Street under the drenching rain. Bars
yawned bright to them at the corners of rainseething streets. Yellow
light off mirrors and brass rails and gilt frames round pictures of
pink naked women was looped and slopped into whiskyglasses guzzled
fiery with tipped back head, oozed bright through the blood, popped
bubbly out of ears and eyes, dripped spluttering off fingertips. The
raindark houses heaved on either side, streetlamps swayed like lanterns
carried in a parade, until Bud was in a back room full of nudging faces
with a woman on his knees. Laplander Matty stood with his arms round
two girls’ necks, yanked his shirt open to show a naked man and a naked
woman tattooed in red and green on his chest, hugging, stiffly coiled
in a seaserpent and when he puffed out his chest and wiggled the skin
with his fingers the tatooed man and woman wiggled and all the nudging
faces laughed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Phineas P. Blackhead pushed up the wide office window. He stood looking
out over the harbor of slate and mica in the uneven roar of traffic,
voices, racket of building that soared from the downtown streets
bellying and curling like smoke in the stiff wind shoving down the
Hudson out of the northwest.

“Hay Schmidt, bring me my field glasses,” he called over his shoulder.
“Look ...” He was focusing the glasses on a thickwaisted white steamer
with a sooty yellow stack that was abreast of Governors Island. “Isn’t
that the _Anonda_ coming in now?”

Schmidt was a fat man who had shrunk. The skin hung in loose haggard
wrinkles on his face. He took one look through the glasses. “Sure it
is.” He pushed down the window; the roar receded tapering hollowly like
the sound of a sea shell.

“Jiminy they were quick about it.... They’ll be docked in half an
hour.... You beat it along over and get hold of Inspector Mulligan.
He’s all fixed.... Dont take your eyes off him. Old Matanzas is out on
the warpath trying to get an injunction against us. If every spoonful
of manganese isnt off by tomorrow night I’ll cut your commission in
half.... Do you get that?”

Schmidt’s loose jowls shook when he laughed. “No danger sir.... You
ought to know me by this time.”

“Of course I do.... You’re a good feller Schmidt. I was just joking.”

Phineas P. Blackhead was a lanky man with silver hair and a red
hawkface; he slipped back into the mahogany armchair at his desk and
rang an electric bell. “All right Charlie, show em in,” he growled at
the towheaded officeboy who appeared in the door. He rose stiffly from
his desk and held out a hand. “How do you do Mr. Storrow ... How do
you do Mr. Gold.... Make yourselves comfortable.... That’s it.... Now
look here, about this strike. The attitude of the railroad and docking
interests that I represent is one of frankness and honesty, you know
that.... I have confidence, I can say I have the completest confidence,
that we can settle this matter amicably and agreeably.... Of course you
must meet me halfway.... We have I know the same interests at heart,
the interests of this great city, of this great seaport....” Mr. Gold
moved his hat to the back of his head and cleared his throat with a
loud barking noise. “Gentlemen, one of two roads lies before us ...”

       *       *       *       *       *

In the sunlight on the windowledge a fly sat scrubbing his wings with
his hinder legs. He cleaned himself all over, twisting and untwisting
his forelegs like a person soaping his hands, stroking the top of
his lobed head carefully; brushing his hair. Jimmy’s hand hovered
over the fly and slapped down. The fly buzzed tinglingly in his palm.
He groped for it with two fingers, held it slowly squeezing it into
mashed gray jelly between finger and thumb. He wiped it off under the
windowledge. A hot sick feeling went through him. Poor old fly, after
washing himself so carefully, too. He stood a long time looking down
the airshaft through the dusty pane where the sun gave a tiny glitter
to the dust. Now and then a man in shirtsleeves crossed the court below
with a tray of dishes. Orders shouted and the clatter of dishwashing
came up faintly from the kitchens.

He stared through the tiny glitter of the dust on the windowpane.
Mother’s had a stroke and next week I’ll go back to school.

“Say Herfy have you learned to fight yet?”

“Herfy an the Kid are goin to fight for the flyweight championship
before lights.”

“But I dont want to.”

“Kid wants to.... Here he comes. Make a ring there you ginks.”

“I dont want to, please.”

“You’ve damn well got to, we’ll beat hell outa both of ye if you dont.”

“Say Freddy that’s a nickel fine from you for swearing.”

“Jez I forgot.”

“There you go again.... Paste him in the slats.”

“Go it Herfy, I’m bettin on yer.”

“That’s it sock him.”

The Kid’s white screwedup face bouncing in front of him like a balloon;
his fist gets Jimmy in the mouth; a salty taste of blood from the cut
lip. Jimmy strikes out, gets him down on the bed, pokes his knee in his
belly. They pull him off and throw him back against the wall.

“Go it Kid.”

“Go it Herfy.”

There’s a smell of blood in his nose and lungs; his breath rasps. A
foot shoots out and trips him up.

“That’s enough, Herfy’s licked.”

“Girlboy ... Girlboy.”

“But hell Freddy he had the Kid down.”

“Shut up, don’t make such a racket.... Old Hoppy’ll be coming up.”

“Just a little friendly bout, wasn’t it Herfy?”

“Get outa my room, all of you, all of you,” Jimmy screeches,
tear-blinded, striking out with both arms.

“Crybaby ... crybaby.”

He slams the door behind them, pushes the desk against it and crawls
trembling into bed. He turns over on his face and lies squirming with
shame, biting the pillow.

Jimmy stared through the tiny glitter of the dust on the windowpane.

     DARLING

     Your poor mother was very unhappy when she finally put you
     on the train and went back to her big empty rooms at the
     hotel. Dear, I am very lonely without you. Do you know what
     I did? I got out all your toy soldiers, the ones that used
     to be in the taking of Port Arthur, and set them all out in
     battalions on the library shelf. Wasn’t that silly? Never
     mind dear, Christmas’ll soon come round and I’ll have my
     boy again....

A crumpled face on a pillow; mother’s had a stroke and next week I’ll
go back to school. Darkgrained skin growing flabby under her eyes, gray
creeping up her brown hair. Mother never laughs. The stroke.

He turned back suddenly into the room, threw himself on the bed with
a thin leather book in his hand. The surf thundered loud on the
barrier reef. He didn’t need to read. Jack was swimming fast through
the calm blue waters of the lagoon, stood in the sun on the yellow
beach shaking the briny drops off him, opened his nostrils wide to the
smell of breadfruit roasting beside his solitary campfire. Birds of
bright plumage shrieked and tittered from the tall ferny tops of the
coconut palms. The room was drowsy hot. Jimmy fell asleep. There was a
strawberry lemon smell, a smell of pineapples on the deck and mother
was there in a white suit and a dark man in a yachtingcap, and the
sunlight rippled on the milkytall sails. Mother’s soft laugh rises into
a shriek O-o-o-ohee. A fly the size of a ferryboat walks towards them
across the water, reaching out jagged crabclaws. “Yump Yimmy, yump; you
can do it in two yumps,” the dark man yells in his ear. “But please I
dont want to ... I dont want to,” Jimmy whines. The dark man’s beating
him, yump yump yump.... “Yes one moment. Who is it?”

Aunt Emily was at the door. “Why do you keep your door locked Jimmy....
I never allow James to lock his door.”

“I like it better that way, Aunt Emily.”

“Imagine a boy asleep this time of the afternoon.”

“I was reading _The Coral Island_ and I fell asleep.” Jimmy was
blushing.

“All right. Come along. Miss Billings said not to stop by mother’s
room. She’s asleep.”

They were in the narrow elevator that smelled of castor oil; the
colored boy grinned at Jimmy.

“What did the doctor say Aunt Emily?”

“Everything’s going as well as could be expected.... But you mustn’t
worry about that. This evening you must have a real good time with your
little cousins.... You dont see enough children of your own age Jimmy.”

They were walking towards the river leaning into a gritty wind that
swirled up the street cast out of iron under a dark silvershot sky.

“I guess you’ll be glad to get back to school, James.”

“Yes Aunt Emily.”

“A boy’s school days are the happiest time in his life. You must be
sure to write your mother once a week at least James.... You are all
she has now.... Miss Billings and I will keep you informed.”

“Yes Aunt Emily.”

“And James I want you to know my James better. He’s the same age you
are, only perhaps a little more developed and all that, and you ought
to be good friends.... I wish Lily had sent you to Hotchkiss too.”

“Yes Aunt Emily.”

There were pillars of pink marble in the lower hall of Aunt Emily’s
apartmenthouse and the elevatorboy wore a chocolate livery with brass
buttons and the elevator was square and decorated with mirrors. Aunt
Emily stopped before a wide red mahogany door on the seventh floor and
fumbled in her purse for her key. At the end of the hall was a leaded
window through which you could see the Hudson and steamboats and tall
trees of smoke rising against the yellow sunset from the yards along
the river. When Aunt Emily got the door open they heard the piano.
“That’s Maisie doing her practicing.” In the room where the piano was
the rug was thick and mossy, the wallpaper was yellow with silveryshiny
roses between the cream woodwork and the gold frames of oilpaintings
of woods and people in a gondola and a fat cardinal drinking. Maisie
tossed the pigtails off her shoulders as she jumped off the pianostool.
She had a round creamy face and a slight pugnose. The metronome went on
ticking.

“Hello James,” she said after she had tilted her mouth up to her
mother’s to be kissed. “I’m awfully sorry poor Aunt Lily’s so sick.”

“Arent you going to kiss your cousin, James?” said Aunt Emily.

Jimmy shambled up to Maisie and pushed his face against hers.

“That’s a funny kind of a kiss,” said Maisie.

“Well you two children can keep each other company till dinner.” Aunt
Emily rustled through the blue velvet curtains into the next room.

“We wont be able to go on calling you James.” After she had stopped the
metronome, Maisie stood staring with serious brown eyes at her cousin.
“There cant be two Jameses can there?”

“Mother calls me Jimmy.”

“Jimmy’s a kinder common name, but I guess it’ll have to do till we can
think of a better one.... How many jacks can you pick up?”

“What are jacks?”

“Gracious dont you know what jackstones are? Wait till James comes
back, wont he laugh!”

“I know Jack roses. Mother used to like them better’n any other kind.”

“American Beauties are the only roses I like,” announced Maisie
flopping into a Morris chair. Jimmy stood on one leg kicking his heel
with the toes of the other foot.

“Where’s James?”

“He’ll be home soon.... He’s having his riding lesson.”

The twilight became leadensilent between them. From the trainyards came
the scream of a locomotivewhistle and the clank of couplings on shunted
freight cars. Jimmy ran to the window.

“Say Maisie, do you like engines?” he asked.

“I think they are horrid. Daddy says we’re going to move on account of
the noise and smoke.”

Through the gloom Jimmy could make out the beveled smooth bulk of a big
locomotive. The smoke rolled out of the stack in huge bronze and lilac
coils. Down the track a red light snapped green. The bell started to
ring slowly, lazily. Forced draft snorting loud the train clankingly
moved, gathered speed, slid into dusk swinging a red taillight.

“Gee I wish we lived here,” said Jimmy. “I’ve got two hundred and
seventytwo pictures of locomotives, I’ll show em to you sometime if you
like. I collect em.”

“What a funny thing to collect.... Look Jimmy you pull the shade down
and I’ll light the light.”

When Maisie pushed the switch they saw James Merivale standing in the
door. He had light wiry hair and a freckled face with a pugnose like
Maisie’s. He had on riding breeches and black leather gaiters and was
flicking a long peeled stick about.

“Hullo Jimmy,” he said. “Welcome to our city.”

“Say James,” cried Maisie, “Jimmy doesn’t know what jackstones are.”

Aunt Emily appeared through the blue velvet curtains. She wore a
highnecked green silk blouse with lace on it. Her white hair rose in a
smooth curve from her forehead. “It’s time you children were washing
up,” she said, “dinner’s in five minutes.... James take your cousin
back to your room and hurry up and take off those ridingclothes.”

Everybody was already seated when Jimmy followed his cousin into the
diningroom. Knives and forks tinkled discreetly in the light of six
candles in red and silver shades. At the end of the table sat Aunt
Emily, next to her a rednecked man with no back to his head, and at the
other end Uncle Jeff with a pearl pin in his checked necktie filled
a broad armchair. The colored maid hovered about the fringe of light
passing toasted crackers. Jimmy ate his soup stiffly, afraid of making
a noise. Uncle Jeff was talking in a booming voice between spoonfuls of
soup.

“No I tell you, Wilkinson, New York is no longer what it used to be
when Emily and I first moved up here about the time the Ark landed....
City’s overrun with kikes and low Irish, that’s what’s the matter with
it.... In ten years a Christian wont be able to make a living.... I
tell you the Catholics and the Jews are going to run us out of our own
country, that’s what they are going to do.”

“It’s the New Jerusalem,” put in Aunt Emily laughing.

“It’s no laughing matter; when a man’s worked hard all his life to
build up a business and that sort of thing he dont want to be run out
by a lot of damn foreigners, does he Wilkinson?”

“Jeff you are getting all excited. You know it gives you
indigestion....”

“I’ll keep cool, mother.”

“The trouble with the people of this country is this, Mr. Merivale” ...
Mr. Wilkinson frowned ponderously. “The people of this country are too
tolerant. There’s no other country in the world where they’d allow
it.... After all we built up this country and then we allow a lot of
foreigners, the scum of Europe, the offscourings of Polish ghettos to
come and run it for us.”

“The fact of the matter is that an honest man wont soil his hands with
politics, and he’s given no inducement to take public office.”

“That’s true, a live man, nowadays, wants more money, needs more money
than he can make honestly in public life.... Naturally the best men
turn to other channels.”

“And add to that the ignorance of these dirty kikes and shanty Irish
that we make voters before they can even talk English ...” began Uncle
Jeff.

The maid set a highpiled dish of fried chicken edged by corn fritters
before Aunt Emily. Talk lapsed while everyone was helped. “Oh I forgot
to tell you Jeff,” said Aunt Emily, “we’re to go up to Scarsdale
Sunday.”

“Oh mother I hate going out Sundays.”

“He’s a perfect baby about staying home.”

“But Sunday’s the only day I get at home.”

“Well it was this way: I was having tea with the Harland girls
at Maillard’s and who should sit down at the next table but Mrs.
Burkhart ...”

“Is that Mrs. John B. Burkhart? Isn’t he one of the vicepresidents of
the National City Bank?”

“John’s a fine feller and a coming man downtown.”

“Well as I was saying dear, Mrs. Burkhart said we just had to come up
and spend Sunday with them and I just couldn’t refuse.”

“My father,” continued Mr. Wilkinson, “used to be old Johannes
Burkhart’s physician. The old man was a cranky old bird, he’d made his
pile in the fur trade way back in Colonel Astor’s day. He had the
gout and used to swear something terrible.... I remember seeing him
once, a redfaced old man with long white hair and a silk skullcap over
his baldspot. He had a parrot named Tobias and people going along the
street never knew whether it was Tobias or Judge Burkhart cussing.”

“Ah well, times have changed,” said Aunt Emily.

Jimmy sat in his chair with pins and needles in his legs. Mother’s
had a stroke and next week I’ll go back to school. Friday, Saturday,
Sunday, Monday.... He and Skinny coming back from playing with the
hoptoads down by the pond, in their blue suits because it was Sunday
afternoon. Smokebushes were in bloom behind the barn. A lot of fellows
teasing little Harris, calling him Iky because he was supposed to be
a Jew. His voice rose in a singsong whine; “Cut it fellers, cant you
fellers. I’ve got my best suit on fellers.”

“Oy Oy Meester Solomon Levy with his best Yiddisher garments all marked
down,” piped jeering voices. “Did you buy it in a five and ten Iky?”

“I bet he got it at a firesale.”

“If he got it at a firesale we ought to turn the hose on him.”

“Let’s turn the hose on Solomon Levy.”

“Oh stop it fellers.”

“Shut up; dont yell so loud.”

“They’re juss kiddin, they wont hurt him,” whispered Skinny.

Iky was carried kicking and bawling down towards the pond, his white
tearwet face upside down. “He’s not a Jew at all,” said Skinny. “But
I’ll tell you who is a Jew, that big bully Fat Swanson.”

“Howjer know?”

“His roommate told me.”

“Gee whiz they’re going to do it.”

They ran in all directions. Little Harris with his hair full of mud was
crawling up the bank, water running out of his coatsleeves.

There was hot chocolate sauce with the icecream. “An Irishman and a
Scotchman were walking down the street and the Irishman said to the
Scotchman; Sandy let’s have a drink....” A prolonged ringing at the
front door bell was making them inattentive to Uncle Jeff’s story. The
colored maid flurried back into the diningroom and began whispering in
Aunt Emily’s ear. “... And the Scotchman said, Mike ... Why what’s the
matter?”

“It’s Mr. Joe sir.”

“The hell it is.”

“Well maybe he’s all right,” said Aunt Emily hastily.

“A bit whipsey, ma’am.”

“Sarah why the dickens did you let him in?”

“I didnt let him, he juss came.”

Uncle Jeff pushed his plate away and slapped down his napkin. “Oh hell
... I’ll go talk to him.”

“Try and make him go ...” Aunt Emily had begun; she stopped with her
mouth partly open. A head was stuck through the curtains that hung in
the wide doorway to the livingroom. It had a birdlike face, with a
thin drooping nose, topped by a mass of straight black hair like an
Indian’s. One of the redrimmed eyes winked quietly.

“Hullo everybody!... How’s every lil thing? Mind if I butt in?” His
voice perked hoarsely as a tall skinny body followed the head through
the curtains. Aunt Emily’s mouth arranged itself in a frosty smile.
“Why Emily you must ... er ... excuse me; I felt an evening ... er
... round the family hearth ... er ... would be ... er ... er ...
beneficial. You understand, the refining influence of the home.” He
stood jiggling his head behind Uncle Jeff’s chair. “Well Jefferson ole
boy, how’s the market?” He brought a hand down on Uncle Jeff’s shoulder.

“Oh all right. Want to sit down?” he growled.

“They tell me ... if you’ll take a tip from an old timer ... er ... a
retired broker ... broker and broker every day ... ha-ha.... But they
tell me that Interborough Rapid Transit’s worth trying a snifter of....
Doan look at me crosseyed like that Emily. I’m going right away....
Why howdedo Mr. Wilkinson.... Kids are looking well. Well I’ll be if
that isn’t Lily Herf’s lil boy.... Jimmy you dont remember your ... er
... cousin, Joe Harland do you? Nobody remembers Joe Harland.... Except
you Emily and you wish you could forget him ... ha-ha.... How’s your
mother Jimmy?”

“A little better thank you,” Jimmy forced the words out through a tight
throat.

“Well when you go home you give her my love ... she’ll understand.
Lily and I have always been good friends even if I am the family
skeleton.... They dont like me, they wish I’d go away.... I’ll tell you
what boy, Lily’s the best of the lot. Isn’t she Emily, isn’t she the
best of the lot of us?”

Aunt Emily cleared her throat. “Sure she is, the best looking, the
cleverest, the realest.... Jimmy your mother’s an emperess.... Aways
been too fine for all this. By gorry I’d like to drink her health.”

“Joe you might moderate your voice a little;” Aunt Emily clicked out
the words like a typewriter.

“Aw you all think I’m drunk.... Remember this Jimmy” ... he leaned
across the table, stroked Jimmy’s face with his grainy whisky breath
... “these things aren’t always a man’s fault ... circumstances ...
er ... circumstances.” He upset a glass staggering to his feet. “If
Emily insists on looking at me crosseyed I’m goin out.... But remember
give Lily Herf Joe Harland’s love even if he has gone to the demnition
bowbows.” He lurched out through the curtains again.

“Jeff I know he’ll upset the Sèvres vase.... See that he gets out all
right and get him a cab.” James and Maisie burst into shrill giggles
from behind their napkins. Uncle Jeff was purple.
“I’ll be damned to hell if I put him in a cab. He’s not my cousin....
He ought to be locked up. And next time you see him you can tell him
this from me, Emily: if he ever comes here in that disgusting condition
again I’ll throw him out.”

“Jefferson dear, it’s no use getting angry.... There’s no harm done.
He’s gone.”

“No harm done! Think of our children. Suppose there’d been a stranger
here instead of Wilkinson. What would he have thought of our home?”

“Dont worry about that,” croaked Mr. Wilkinson, “accidents will happen
in the best regulated families.”

“Poor Joe’s such a sweet boy when he’s himself,” said Aunt Emily. “And
think that it looked for a while years ago as if Harland held the whole
Curb Market in the palm of his hand. The papers called him the King
of the Curb, dont you remember?” “That was before the Lottie Smithers
affair....”

“Well suppose you children go and play in the other room while we have
our coffee,” chirped Aunt Emily. “Yes, they ought to have gone long
ago.”

“Can you play Five Hundred, Jimmy?” asked Maisie.

“No I cant.”

“What do you think of that James, he cant play jacks and he cant play
Five Hundred.”

“Well they’re both girl’s games,” said James loftily. “I wouldn’t play
em either xept on account of you.”

“Oh wouldn’t you, Mr. Smarty.”

“Let’s play animal grabs.”

“But there aren’t enough of us for that. It’s no fun without a crowd.”

“An last time you got the giggles so bad mother made us stop.”

“Mother made us stop because you kicked little Billy Schmutz in the
funnybone an made him cry.”

“Spose we go down an look at the trains,” put in Jimmy.

“We’re not allowed to go down stairs after dark,” said Maisie severely.

“I’ll tell you what lets play stock exchange.... I’ve got a million
dollars in bonds to sell and Maisie can be the bulls an Jimmy can be
the bears.”

“All right, what do we do?”

“Oh juss run round an yell mostly.... I’m selling short.”

“All right Mr. Broker I’ll buy em all at five cents each.”

“No you cant say that.... You say ninetysix and a half or something
like that.”

“I’ll give you five million for them,” cried Maisie waving the blotter
of the writing desk.

“But you fool, they’re only worth one million,” shouted Jimmy.

Maisie stood still in her tracks. “Jimmy what did you say then?” Jimmy
felt shame flame up through him; he looked at his stubby shoes. “I
said, you fool.”

“Haven’t you ever been to Sunday school? Don’t you know that God says
in the Bible that if you call anybody Thou fool you’ll be in danger of
hellfire?”

Jimmy didn’t dare raise his eyes.

“Well I’m not going to play any more,” said Maisie drawing herself
up. Jimmy somehow found himself out in the hall. He grabbed his hat
and ran out the door and down the six flights of white stone stairs
past the brass buttons and chocolate livery of the elevator boy, out
through the hall that had pink marble pillars in to Seventysecond
Street. It was dark and blowy, full of ponderous advancing shadows and
chasing footsteps. At last he was climbing the familiar crimson stairs
of the hotel. He hurried past his mother’s door. They’d ask him why
he had come home so soon. He burst into his own room, shot the bolt,
doublelocked the door and stood leaning against it panting.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Well are you married yet?” was the first thing Congo asked when Emile
opened the door to him. Emile was in his undershirt. The shoebox-shaped
room was stuffy, lit and heated by a gas crown with a tin cap on it.

“Where are you in from this time?”

“Bizerta and Trondjeb.... I’m an able seaman.”

“That’s a rotten job, going to sea.... I’ve saved two hundred dollars.
I’m working at Delmonico’s.”

They sat down side by side on the unmade bed. Congo produced a package
of gold tipped Egyptian Deities. “Four months’ pay”; he slapped his
thigh. “Seen May Sweitzer?” Emile shook his head. “I’ll have to find
the little son of a gun.... In those goddam Scandinavian ports they
come out in boats, big fat blond women in bumboats....”

They were silent. The gas hummed. Congo let his breath out in a
whistle. “Whee ... C’est chic ça, Delmonico ... Why havent you married
her?”

“She likes to have me hang around.... I’d run the store better than she
does.”

“You’re too easy; got to use rough stuff with women to get anything
outa them.... Make her jealous.”

“She’s got me going.”

“Want to see some postalcards?” Congo pulled a package, wrapped in
newspaper out of his pocket. “Look these are Naples; everybody there
wants to come to New York.... That’s an Arab dancing girl. Nom d’une
vache they got slippery bellybuttons....”

“Say, I know what I’ll do,” cried Emile suddenly dropping the cards on
the bed. “I’ll make her jealous....”

“Who?”

“Ernestine ... Madame Rigaud....”

“Sure walk up an down Eighth Avenue with a girl a couple of times an I
bet she’ll fall like a ton of bricks.”

The alarmclock went off on the chair beside the bed. Emile jumped up to
stop it and began splashing water on his face in the washbasin.

“Merde I got to go to work.”

“I’ll go over to Hell’s Kitchen an see if I can find May.”

“Don’t be a fool an spend all your money,” said Emile who stood at the
cracked mirror with his face screwed up, fastening the buttons in the
front of a clean boiled shirt.

       *       *       *       *       *

“It’s a sure thing I’m tellin yer,” said the man again and again,
bringing his face close to Ed Thatcher’s face and rapping the desk with
his flat hand.

“Maybe it is Viler but I seen so many of em go under, honest I dont see
how I can risk it.”

“Man I’ve hocked the misses’s silver teaset and my diamond ring an the
baby’s mug.... It’s a sure sure thing.... I wouldn’t let you in on
it, xept you an me’s been pretty good friends an I owe you money an
everythin.... You’ll make twentyfive percent on your money by tomorrow
noon.... Then if you want to hold you can on a gamble, but if you sell
three quarters and hold the rest two or three days on a chance you’re
safe as ... as the Rock of Gibraltar.”

“I know Viler, it certainly sounds good....”

“Hell man you dont want to be in this damned office all your life, do
you? Think of your little girl.”

“I am, that’s the trouble.”

“But Ed, Gibbons and Swandike had started buying already at three cents
when the market closed this evening.... Klein got wise an’ll be right
there with bells on first thing in the morning. The market’ll go crazy
on it....”

“Unless the fellers doin the dirty work change their minds. I know
that stuff through and through, Viler.... Sounds like a topnotch
proposition.... But I’ve examined the books of too many bankrupts.”

Viler got to his feet and threw his cigar into the cuspidor. “Well
do as you like, damn it all.... I guess you must like commuting from
Hackensack an working twelve hours a day....”

“I believe in workin my way up, that’s all.”

“What’s the use of a few thousands salted away when you’re old and cant
get any satisfaction? Man I’m goin in with both feet.”

“Go to it Viler.... You tellem,” muttered Thatcher as the other man
stamped out slamming the office door.

The big office with its series of yellow desks and hooded typewriters
was dark except for the tent of light in which Thatcher sat at a desk
piled with ledgers. The three windows at the end were not curtained.
Through them he could see the steep bulk of buildings scaled with
lights and a plankshaped bit of inky sky. He was copying memoranda on
a long sheet of legal cap.

FanTan Import and Export Company (statement of assets and liabilities
up to and including February 29) ... Branches New York, Shanghai,
Hongkong and Straights Settlements....

        Balance carried over   $345,789.84
        Real Estate             500,087.12
        Profit and Loss         399,765.90

“A bunch of goddam crooks,” growled Thatcher out loud. “Not an item
on the whole thing that aint faked. I dont believe they’ve got any
branches in Hongkong or anywhere....”

He leaned back in his chair and stared out of the window. The buildings
were going dark. He could just make out a star in the patch of sky.
Ought to go out an eat, bum for the digestion to eat irregularly like
I do. Suppose I’d taken a plunge on Viler’s red hot tip. Ellen, how
do you like these American Beauty roses? They have stems eight feet
long, and I want you to look over the itinerary of the trip abroad I’ve
mapped out to finish your education. Yes it will be a shame to leave
our fine new apartment looking out over Central Park.... And downtown;
The Fiduciary Accounting Institute, Edward C. Thatcher, President....
Blobs of steam were drifting up across the patch of sky, hiding the
star. Take a plunge, take a plunge ... they’re all crooks and gamblers
anyway ... take a plunge and come up with your hands full, pockets
full, bankaccount full, vaults full of money. If I only dared take the
risk. Fool to waste your time fuming about it. Get back to the FanTan
Import. Steam faintly ruddy with light reflected from the streets
swarmed swiftly up across the patch of sky, twisting scattering.

Goods on hand in U. S. bonded warehouses ... $325,666.00

Take a plunge and come up with three hundred and twentyfive thousand,
six hundred and sixtysix dollars. Dollars swarming up like steam,
twisting scattering against the stars. Millionaire Thatcher leaned
out of the window of the bright patchouliscented room to look at
the dark-jutting city steaming with laughter, voices, tinkling and
lights; behind him orchestras played among the azaleas, private wires
click click clickclicked dollars from Singapore, Valparaiso, Mukden,
Hongkong, Chicago. Susie leaned over him in a dress made of orchids,
breathed in his ear.

Ed Thatcher got to his feet with clenched fists sniveling; You poor
fool whats the use now she’s gone. I’d better go eat or Ellen’ll scold
me.




V. Steamroller

          _Dusk gently smooths crispangled streets. Dark presses
          tight the steaming asphalt city, crushes the fretwork of
          windows and lettered signs and chimneys and watertanks and
          ventilators and fireescapes and moldings and patterns and
          corrugations and eyes and hands and neckties into blue
          chunks, into black enormous blocks. Under the rolling
          heavier heavier pressure windows blurt light. Night crushes
          bright milk out of arclights, squeezes the sullen blocks
          until they drip red, yellow, green into streets resounding
          with feet. All the asphalt oozes light. Light spurts from
          lettering on roofs, mills dizzily among wheels, stains
          rolling tons of sky._


A steamroller was clattering back and forth over the freshly tarred
metaling of the road at the cemetery gate. A smell of scorched grease
and steam and hot paint came from it. Jimmy Herf picked his way along
the edge of the road; the stones were sharp against his feet through
the worn soles of his shoes. He brushed past swarthy-necked workmen
and walked on over the new road with a whiff of garlic and sweat
from them in his nostrils. After a hundred yards he stopped over the
gray suburban road, laced tight on both sides with telegraph poles
and wires, over the gray paperbox houses and the gray jagged lots of
monumentmakers, the sky was the color of a robin’s egg. Little worms of
May were writhing in his blood. He yanked off his black necktie and put
it in his pocket. A tune was grinding crazily through his head:

    I’m so tired of vi-olets
    Take them all away.

There is one glory of the sun and another glory of the moon and another
glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory.
So also is the resurrection of the dead.... He walked on fast splashing
through puddles full of sky, trying to shake the droning welloiled
words out of his ears, to get the feeling of black crêpe off his
fingers, to forget the smell of lilies.

    I’m so tired of vi-olets
    Take them all away.

He walked faster. The road climbed a hill. There was a bright runnel of
water in the ditch, flowing through patches of grass and dandelions.
There were fewer houses; on the sides of barns peeling letters spelled
out LYDIA PINKHAM’S VEGETABLE COMPOUND, BUDWEISER, RED HEN, BARKING
DOG.... And muddy had had a stroke and now she was buried. He couldn’t
think how she used to look; she was dead that was all. From a fencepost
came the moist whistling of a songsparrow. The minute rusty bird flew
ahead, perched on a telegraph wire and sang, and flew ahead to the
rim of an abandoned boiler and sang, and flew ahead and sang. The sky
was getting a darker blue, filling with flaked motherofpearl clouds.
For a last moment he felt the rustle of silk beside him, felt a hand
in a trailing lacefrilled sleeve close gently over his hand. Lying in
his crib with his feet pulled up cold under the menace of the shaggy
crouching shadows; and the shadows scuttled melting into corners when
she leaned over him with curls round her forehead, in silkpuffed
sleeves, with a tiny black patch at the corner of the mouth that kissed
his mouth. He walked faster. The blood flowed full and hot in his
veins. The flaked clouds were melting into rosecolored foam. He could
hear his steps on the worn macadam. At a crossroad the sun glinted
on the sticky pointed buds of a beechsapling. Opposite a sign read
YONKERS. In the middle of the road teetered a dented tomatocan. Kicking
it hard in front of him he walked on. One glory of the sun and another
glory of the moon and another glory of the stars.... He walked on.
“Hullo Emile!” Emile nodded without turning his head. The girl ran
after him and grabbed his coatsleeve. “That’s the way you treat
your old friends is it? Now that you’re keepin company with that
delicatessen queen ...”

Emile yanked his hand away. “I am in a ’urree zat’s all.”

“How’d ye like it if I went an told her how you an me framed it up to
stand in front of the window on Eighth Avenue huggin an kissin juss to
make her fall for yez.”

“Zat was Congo’s idea.”

“Well didn’t it woik?”

“Sure.”

“Well aint there sumpen due me?”

“May you’re a veree nice leetle girl. Next week my night off is
Wednesday.... I’ll come by an take you to a show.... ’Ow’s ’ustlin?”

“Worse’n hell.... I’m tryin out for a dancin job up at the Campus....
That’s where you meet guys wid jack.... No more of dese sailor boys and
shorefront stiffs.... I’m gettin respectable.”

“May ’ave you ’eard from Congo?”

“Got a postalcard from some goddam place I couldn’t read the name
of.... Aint it funny when you write for money an all ye git ’s a postal
ca-ard.... That’s the kid gits me for the askin any night.... An he’s
the only one, savvy, Frogslegs?”

“Goodby May.” He suddenly pushed the straw bonnet trimmed with
forgetmenots back on her head and kissed her.

“Hey quit dat Frogslegs ... Eighth Avenue aint no place to kiss a
girl,” she whined pushing a yellow curl back under her hat. “I could
git you run in an I’ve half a mind to.”

Emile walked off.

A fire engine, a hosewagon, and a hookandladder passed him, shattering
the street with clattering roar. Three blocks down smoke and an
occasional gasp of flame came from the roof of a house. A crowd was
jammed up against the policelines. Beyond backs and serried hats Emile
caught a glimpse of firemen on the roof of the next house and of three
silently glittering streams of water playing into the upper windows.
Must be right opposite the delicatessen. He was making his way through
the jam on the sidewalk when the crowd suddenly opened. Two policemen
were dragging out a negro whose arms snapped back and forth like broken
cables. A third cop came behind cracking the negro first on one side of
the head, then on the other with his billy.

“It’s a shine ’at set the fire.”

“They caught the firebug.”

“’At’s ’e incendiary.”

“God he’s a meanlookin smoke.”

The crowd closed in. Emile was standing beside Madame Rigaud in front
of the door of her store.

“Cheri que ça me fait une emotiong.... J’ai horriblemong peu du feu.”

Emile was standing a little behind her. He let one arm crawl slowly
round her waist and patted her arm with his other hand, “Everyting
awright. Look no more fire, only smoke.... But you are insured, aint
you?”

“Oh yes for fifteen tousand.” He squeezed her hand and then took his
arms away. “Viens ma petite on va rentrer.”

Once inside the shop he took both her plump hands. “Ernestine when we
get married?”

“Next month.”

“I no wait zat long, imposseeble.... Why not next Wednesday? Then I
can help you make inventory of stock.... I tink maybe we can sell this
place and move uptown, make bigger money.”

She patted him on the cheek. “P’tit ambitieux,” she said through her
hollow inside laugh that made her shoulders and her big bust shake.

       *       *       *       *       *

They had to change at Manhattan Transfer. The thumb of Ellen’s new kid
glove had split and she kept rubbing it nervously with her forefinger.
John wore a belted raincoat and a pinkishgray felt hat. When he turned
to her and smiled she couldn’t help pulling her eyes away and staring
out at the long rain that shimmered over the tracks.

“Here we are Elaine dear. Oh prince’s daughter, you see we get the
train that comes from the Penn station.... It’s funny this waiting in
the wilds of New Jersey this way.” They got into the parlorcar. John
made a little clucking sound in his mouth at the raindrops that made
dark dimes on his pale hat. “Well we’re off, little girl.... Behold
thou art fair my love, thou art fair, thou hast dove’s eyes within thy
locks.”

Ellen’s new tailored suit was tight at the elbows. She wanted to feel
very gay and listen to his purring whisper in her ears, but something
had set her face in a tight frown; she could only look out at the
brown marshes and the million black windows of factories and the
puddly streets of towns and a rusty steamboat in a canal and barns
and Bull Durham signs and roundfaced Spearmint gnomes all barred and
crisscrossed with bright flaws of rain. The jeweled stripes on the
window ran straight down when the train stopped and got more and more
oblique as it speeded up. The wheels rumbled in her head, saying
Man-hattan Tran-sfer. Man-hattan Tran-sfer. Anyway it was a long time
before Atlantic City. By the time we get to Atlantic City ... _Oh it
rained forty days_ ... I’ll be feeling gay.... _And it rained forty
nights._... I’ve got to be feeling gay.

“Elaine Thatcher Oglethorpe, that’s a very fine name, isn’t it,
darling? Oh stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples for I am sick
of love....”

It was so comfortable in the empty parlorcar in the green velvet
chair with John leaning towards her reciting nonsense with the brown
marshlands slipping by behind the rainstriped window and a smell like
clams seeping into the car. She looked into his face and laughed. A
blush ran all over his face to the roots of his redblond hair. He put
his hand in its yellow glove over her hand in its white glove. “You’re
my wife now Elaine.”

“You’re my husband now John.” And laughing they looked at each other in
the coziness of the empty parlorcar.

White letters, ATLANTIC CITY, spelled doom over the rainpitted water.

Rain lashed down the glaring boardwalk and crashed in gusts against the
window like water thrown out of a bucket. Beyond the rain she could
hear the intermittent rumble of the surf along the beach between the
illuminated piers. She lay on her back staring at the ceiling. Beside
her in the big bed John lay asleep breathing quietly like a child with
a pillow doubled up under his head. She was icy cold. She slid out of
bed very carefully not to wake him, and stood looking out the window
down the very long V of lights of the boardwalk. She pushed up the
window. The rain lashed in her face spitefully stinging her flesh,
wetting her nightdress. She pushed her forehead against the frame. Oh
I want to die. I want to die. All the tight coldness of her body was
clenching in her stomach. Oh I’m going to be sick. She went into the
bathroom and closed the door. When she had vomited she felt better.
Then she climbed into bed again careful not to touch John. If she
touched him she would die. She lay on her back with her hands tight
against her sides and her feet together. The parlorcar rumbled cozily
in her head; she fell asleep.
Wind rattling the windowframes wakened her. John was far away, the
other side of the big bed. With the wind and the rain streaming in
the window it was as if the room and the big bed and everything were
moving, running forward like an airship over the sea. _Oh it rained
forty days._... Through a crack in the cold stiffness the little tune
trickled warm as blood.... _And it rained forty nights._ Gingerly she
drew a hand over her husband’s hair. He screwed his face up in his
sleep and whined “Dont” in a littleboy’s voice that made her giggle.
She lay giggling on the far edge of the bed, giggling desperately as
she used to with girls at school. And the rain lashed through the
window and the song grew louder until it was a brass band in her ears:

    Oh it rained forty days
    And it rained forty nights
    And it didn’t stop till Christmas
    And the only man that survived the flood
    Was longlegged Jack of the Isthmus.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jimmy Herf sits opposite Uncle Jeff. Each has before him on a blue
plate a chop, a baked potato, a little mound of peas and a sprig of
parsely.

“Well look about you Jimmy,” says Uncle Jeff. Bright topstory light
brims the walnutpaneled diningroom, glints twistedly on silver knives
and forks, gold teeth, watch-chains, scarfpins, is swallowed up in the
darkness of broadcloth and tweed, shines roundly on polished plates and
bald heads and covers of dishes. “Well what do you think of it?” asks
Uncle Jeff burying his thumbs in the pockets of his fuzzy buff vest.

“It’s a fine club all right,” says Jimmy.
“The wealthiest and the most successful men in the country eat lunch up
here. Look at the round table in the corner. That’s the Gausenheimers’
table. Just to the left.” ... Uncle Jeff leans forward lowering his
voice, “the man with the powerful jaw is J. Wilder Laporte.” Jimmy cuts
into his muttonchop without answering. “Well Jimmy, you probably know
why I brought you down here ... I want to talk to you. Now that your
poor mother has ... has been taken, Emily and I are your guardians in
the eyes of the law and the executors of poor Lily’s will.... I want to
explain to you just how things stand.” Jimmy puts down his knife and
fork and sits staring at his uncle, clutching the arms of his chair
with cold hands, watching the jowl move blue and heavy above the ruby
stickpin in the wide satin cravat. “You are sixteen now aren’t you
Jimmy?”

“Yes sir.”

“Well it’s this way.... When your mother’s estate is all settled up
you’ll find yourself in the possession of approximately fiftyfive
hundred dollars. Luckily you are a bright fellow and will be ready
for college early. Now, properly husbanded that sum ought to see you
through Columbia, since you insist on going to Columbia.... I myself,
and I’m sure your Aunt Emily feels the same way about it, would much
rather see you go to Yale or Princeton.... You are a very lucky
fellow in my estimation. At your age I was sweeping out an office
in Fredericksburg and earning fifteen dollars a month. Now what I
wanted to say was this ... I have not noticed that you felt sufficient
responsibility about moneymatters ... er ... sufficient enthusiasm
about earning your living, making good in a man’s world. Look around
you.... Thrift and enthusiasm has made these men what they are. It’s
made me, put me in the position to offer you the comfortable home,
the cultured surroundings that I do offer you.... I realize that your
education has been a little peculiar, that poor Lily did not have quite
the same ideas that we have on many subjects, but the really formative
period of your life is beginning. Now’s the time to take a brace and
lay the foundations of your future career.... What I advise is that you
follow James’s example and work your way up through the firm.... From
now on you are both sons of mine.... It will mean hard work but it’ll
eventually offer a very substantial opening. And dont forget this, if a
man’s a success in New York, he’s a success!” Jimmy sits watching his
uncle’s broad serious mouth forming words, without tasting the juicy
mutton of the chop he is eating. “Well what are you going to make of
yourself?” Uncle Jeff leaned towards him across the table with bulging
gray eyes.

Jimmy chokes on a piece of bread, blushes, at last stammers weakly,
“Whatever you say Uncle Jeff.”

“Does that mean you’ll go to work for a month this summer in my
office? Get a taste of how it feels to make a living, like a man in a
man’s world, get an idea of how the business is run?” Jimmy nods his
head. “Well I think you’ve come to a very sensible decision,” booms
Uncle Jeff leaning back in his chair so that the light strikes across
the wave of his steelgray hair. “By the way what’ll you have for
dessert?... Years from now Jimmy, when you are a successful man with a
business of your own we’ll remember this talk. It’s the beginning of
your career.”

The hatcheck girl smiles from under the disdainful pile of her billowy
blond hair when she hands Jimmy his hat that looks squashed flat and
soiled and limp among the big-bellied derbies and the fedoras and the
majestic panamas hanging on the pegs. His stomach turns a somersault
with the drop of the elevator. He steps out into the crowded marble
hall. For a moment not knowing which way to go, he stands back against
the wall with his hands in his pockets, watching people elbow their
way through the perpetually revolving doors; softcheeked girls chewing
gum, hatchetfaced girls with bangs, creamfaced boys his own age, young
toughs with their hats on one side, sweatyfaced messengers, crisscross
glances, sauntering hips, red jowls masticating cigars, sallow concave
faces, flat bodies of young men and women, paunched bodies of elderly
men, all elbowing, shoving, shuffling, fed in two endless tapes through
the revolving doors out into Broadway, in off Broadway. Jimmy fed in a
tape in and out the revolving doors, noon and night and morning, the
revolving doors grinding out his years like sausage meat. All of a
sudden his muscles stiffen. Uncle Jeff and his office can go plumb to
hell. The words are so loud inside him he glances to one side and the
other to see if anyone heard him say them.
